The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code)
Rules, 20211
[updated as on 6.4.2023]
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1), clauses (z) and (zg) of sub-section (2)
of section 87 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), and in supersession of the
Information Technology (Intermediaries Guidelines) Rules, 2011, except as respect things
done or omitted to be done before such supersession, the Central Government hereby makes
the following rules, namely:—
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short Title and Commencement.—(1) These rules may be called the Information
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions.—(1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,—

1

(a)

‘access control mechanism’ means any measure, including a technical measure,
through which access to online curated content may be restricted based on
verification of the identity or age of a user;

(b)

‘access services’ means any measure, including technical measure such as closed
captioning, subtitles and audio descriptions, through which the accessibility of
online curated content may be improved for persons with disabilities;

(c)

‘Act’ means the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);

(d)

‘child’ means any person below the age of eighteen years;

(e)

‘committee’ means the Inter-Departmental Committee constituted under rule 14;

(f)

‘communication link’ means a connection between a hypertext or graphical
element, and one or more items in the same or different electronic document
wherein upon clicking on a hyperlinked item, the user is automatically transferred
to the other end of the hyperlink which can be another electronic record or another
website or application or graphical element;

(g)

‘content’ means the electronic record defined in clause (t) of section 2 of the Act;

(h)

‘content descriptor’ means the issues and concerns which are relevant to the
classification of any online curated content, including discrimination, depiction of
illegal or harmful substances, imitable behaviour, nudity, language, sex, violence,
fear, threat, horror and other such concerns as specified in the Schedule annexed to
the rules;

(i)

‘digital media’ means digitized content that can be transmitted over the internet or
computer networks and includes content received, stored, transmitted, edited or
processed by-

Vide G.S.R. 139(E), dated 25.2.2021, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Sec. 3(i), dated
25.2.2021.

(i)

an intermediary; or

(ii)

a publisher of news and current affairs content or a publisher of online
curated content;

(j)

‘grievance’ includes any complaint, whether regarding any content, any duties of
an intermediary or publisher under the Act, or other matters pertaining to the
computer resource of an intermediary or publisher, as the case may be;

(k)

‘Grievance Officer’ means an officer appointed by the intermediary or the 1[online
gaming self-regulatory body or the] publisher, as the case may be, for the purposes
of these rules;

2

[(ka) ‘Grievance Appellate Committee’ means a grievance appellate committee
constituted under rule 3A;]

(l)

‘Ministry’ means, for the purpose of Part II of these rules unless specified
otherwise, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government
of India, and for the purpose of Part III of these rules, the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting, Government of India;

(m) ‘news and current affairs content’ includes newly received or noteworthy content,
including analysis, especially about recent events primarily of socio-political,
economic or cultural nature, made available over the internet or computer
networks, and any digital media shall be news and current affairs content where
the context, substance, purpose, import and meaning of such information is in the
nature of news and current affairs content.
(n)

‘newspaper’ means a periodical of loosely folded sheets usually printed on
newsprint and brought out daily or at least once in a week, containing information
on current events, public news or comments on public news;

(o)

‘news aggregator’ means an entity who, performing a significant role in
determining the news and current affairs content being made available, makes
available to users a computer resource that enable such users to access the news
and current affairs content which is aggregated, curated and presented by such
entity.

(p)

‘on demand’ means a system where a user, subscriber or viewer is enabled to
access, at a time chosen by such user, any content in electronic form, which is
transmitted over a computer resource and is selected by the user;

(q) ‘online curated content’ means any curated catalogue of audio-visual content, other
than news and current affairs content, which is owned by, licensed to or contracted
to be transmitted by a publisher of online curated content, and made available on
demand, including but not limited through subscription, over the internet or
computer networks, and includes films, audio visual programmes, documentaries,
television programmes, serials, podcasts and other such content;

1
2

Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.
Ins. by G.S.R. 794(E), dated 28.10.2022 (w.e.f. 28.10.2022).

1

[(qa) ‘online game’ means a game that is offered on the Internet and is accessible by a
user through a computer resource or an intermediary.
Explanation.—In this clause, ‘Internet’ means the combination of computer
facilities and electromagnetic transmission media, and related equipment and
software, comprising the interconnected worldwide network of computer networks
that transmits information based on a protocol for controlling such transmission;

(qb) ‘online gaming intermediary’ means any intermediary that enables the users of its
computer resource to access one or more online games;
(qc) ‘online gaming self-regulatory body’ means an entity designated as such under rule
4A;
(qd) ‘online real money game’ means an online game where a user makes a deposit in
cash or kind with the expectation of earning winnings on that deposit.
Explanation.—In this clause, ‘winnings’ means any prize, in cash or kind, which
is distributed or intended to be distributed to a user of an online game based on the
performance of the user and in accordance with the rules of such online game;
(qe) ‘permissible online game’ means a permissible online real money game or any other
online game that is not an online real money game;
(qf) ‘permissible online real money game’ means an online real money game verified by
an online gaming self-regulatory body under rule 4A;]

1

(r)

‘person’ means a person as defined in sub-section (31) of section 2 of the Income
tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);

(s)

‘publisher’ means a publisher of news and current affairs content or a publisher of
online curated content;

(t)

‘publisher of news and current affairs content’ means an online paper, news portal,
news aggregator, news agency and such other entity called by whatever name,
which is functionally similar to publishers of news and current affairs content but
shall not include newspapers, replica e-papers of the newspaper and any individual
or user who is not transmitting content in the course of systematic business,
professional or commercial activity;

(u)

‘publisher of online curated content’ means a publisher who, performing a
significant role in determining the online curated content being made available,
makes available to users a computer resource that enables such users to access
online curated content over the internet or computer networks, and such other entity
called by whatever name, which is functionally similar to publishers of online
curated content but does not include any individual or user who is not transmitting
online curated content in the course of systematic business, professional or
commercial activity;

Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.

‘significant social media intermediary’ means a social media intermediary having
number of registered users in India above such threshold as notified by the Central
Government;

(v)

(w) ‘social media intermediary’ means an intermediary which primarily or solely
enables online interaction between two or more users and allows them to create,
upload, share, disseminate, modify or access information using its services;
(x) ‘user’ means any person who accesses or avails any computer resource of an
intermediary or a publisher for the purpose of hosting, publishing, sharing,
transacting, viewing, displaying, downloading or uploading information and
includes other persons jointly participating in using such computer resource and
addressee and originator;
‘user account’ means the account registration of a user with an intermediary or
publisher and includes profiles, accounts, pages, handles and other similar
presences by means of which a user is able to access the services offered by the
intermediary or publisher.

(y)

(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in these rules but defined in the Act and rules
made thereunder shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Act and the said rules,
as the case may be.
PART II
DUE DILIGENCE BY INTERMEDIARIES AND GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL
MECHANISM
3. (1) Due diligence by an intermediary: An intermediary, including 1[a social media
intermediary, a significant social media intermediary and an online gaming intermediary], shall
observe the following due diligence while discharging its duties, namely:—
2

[(a) the intermediary shall prominently publish on its website, mobile based
application or both, as the case may be, the rules and regulations, privacy policy

Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for “social media intermediary and significant social media
intermediary”.
2
Subs. by G.S.R. 794(E), dated 28.10.2022, for clauses (a) and (b) (w.e.f. 28.10.2022). Clauses (a) and (b), before
substitution, stood as under:
“(a) the intermediary shall prominently publish on its website, mobile based application or both, as the case
may be, the rules and regulations, privacy policy and user agreement for access or usage of its computer
resource by any person;
(b) the rules and regulations, privacy policy or user agreement of the intermediary shall inform the user of
its computer resource not to host, display, upload, modify, publish, transmit, store, update or share any
information that,—
(i)
belongs to another person and to which the user does not have any right;
(ii) is defamatory, obscene, pornographic, paedophilic, invasive of another’s privacy, including
bodily privacy, insulting or harassing on the basis of gender, libellous, racially or ethnically
objectionable, relating or encouraging money laundering or gambling, or otherwise inconsistent
with or contrary to the laws in force;
(iii) is harmful to child;
(iv) infringes any patent, trademark, copyright or other proprietary rights;
(v) violates any law for the time being in force;
(vi) deceives or misleads the addressee about the origin of the message or knowingly and intentionally
communicates any information which is patently false or misleading in nature but may reasonably
be perceived as a fact;
(vii) impersonates another person;
1

and user agreement in English or any language specified in the Eighth Schedule
to the Constitution for access or usage of its computer resource by any person in
the language of his choice and ensure compliance of the same;
(b) the intermediary shall inform its rules and regulations, privacy policy and user
agreement to the user in English or any language specified in the Eighth Schedule
to the Constitution in the language of his choice and shall make reasonable efforts
1
[by itself, and to cause the users of its computer resource to not host], display,
upload, modify, publish, transmit, store, update or share any information that,—
(i)

belongs to another person and to which the user does not have any right;

(ii)

is obscene, pornographic, paedophilic, invasive of another’s privacy
including bodily privacy, insulting or harassing on the basis of gender,
racially or ethnically objectionable, relating or encouraging money
laundering or gambling,2[or an online game that causes user harm,] or
promoting enmity between different groups on the grounds of religion
or caste with the intent to incite violence;

(iii) is harmful to child;
(iv) infringes any patent, trademark, copyright or other proprietary rights;
(v)

deceives or misleads the addressee about the origin of the message or
knowingly and intentionally communicates any misinformation or
information which is patently false and untrue or misleading in nature
3
[or, in respect of any business of the Central Government, is identified
as fake or false or misleading by such fact check unit of the Central
Government as the Ministry may, by notification published in the
Official Gazette, specify];

(vi) impersonates another person;
(vii) threatens the unity, integrity, defence, security or sovereignty of India,
friendly relations with foreign States, or public order, or causes
incitement to the commission of any cognisable offence, or prevents
investigation of any offence, or is insulting other nation;
(viii) contains software virus or any other computer code, file or program
designed to interrupt, destroy or limit the functionality of any computer
resource;

(viii) threatens the unity, integrity, defence, security or sovereignty of India, friendly relations with
foreign States, or public order, or causes incitement to the commission of any cognisable offence
or prevents investigation of any offence or is insulting other nation;
(ix) contains software virus or any other computer code, file or program designed to interrupt, destroy
or limit the functionality of any computer resource;
(x) is patently false and untrue, and is written or published in any form, with the intent to mislead or
harass a person, entity or agency for financial gain or to cause any injury to any person;”.
Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for “to cause the user of its computer resource not to host,”.
Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.
3
Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.
1
2

1

[(ix) is in the nature of an online game that is not verified as a permissible
online game;
(x) is in the nature of advertisement or surrogate advertisement or promotion
of an online game that is not a permissible online game, or of any online
gaming intermediary offering such an online game;
(xi) violates any law for the time being in force;
Explanation.—In this clause, “user harm” and “harm” mean any effect which
is detrimental to a user or child, as the case may be;]]

(c)

an intermediary shall periodically inform its users, at least once every year, that
in case of non-compliance with rules and regulations, privacy policy or user
agreement for access or usage of the computer resource of such intermediary, it
has the right to terminate the access or usage rights of the users to the computer
resource immediately or remove non-compliant information or both, as the case
may be;

(d)

an intermediary, on whose computer resource the information is stored, hosted
or published, upon receiving actual knowledge in the form of an order by a
court of competent jurisdiction or on being notified by the Appropriate
Government or its agency under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 79 of
the Act, shall not host, store or publish any unlawful information, which is
prohibited under any law for the time being in force in relation to the interest of
the sovereignty and integrity of India; security of the State; friendly relations
with foreign States; public order; decency or morality; in relation to contempt
of court; defamation; incitement to an offence relating to the above, or any
information which is prohibited under any law for the time being in force:
Provided that any notification made by the Appropriate Government or
its agency in relation to any information which is prohibited under any law for
the time being in force shall be issued by an authorised agency, as may be
notified by the Appropriate Government:
Provided further that if any such information is hosted, stored or
published, the intermediary shall remove or disable access to that information,
as early as possible, but in no case later than thirty-six hours from the receipt of
the court order or on being notified by the Appropriate Government or its
agency, as the case may be:
Provided also that the removal or disabling of access to any information,
data or communication link within the categories of information specified under
this clause, under clause (b) on a voluntary basis, or on the basis of grievances
received under sub-rule (2) by such intermediary, shall not amount to a violation
of the conditions of clauses (a) or (b) of sub-section (2) of section 79 of the Act;

1

Subs.by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for clause (ix). Clause (ix), before substitution, stood as under:
“(ix) violates any law for the time being in force;”.

(e)

the temporary or transient or intermediate storage of information automatically
by an intermediary in a computer resource within its control as an intrinsic
feature of that computer resource, involving no exercise of any human,
automated or algorithmic editorial control for onward transmission or
communication to another computer resource shall not amount to hosting,
storing or publishing any information referred to under clause (d);

1

the intermediary shall periodically, and at least once in a year, inform its users
in English or any language specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution
in the language of his choice of its rules and regulations, privacy policy or user
agreement or any change in the rules and regulations, privacy policy or user
agreement, as the case may be:]

[(f)

2

[Provided that an online gaming intermediary who enables the users to
access any permissible online real money game shall inform its users of such
change as soon as possible, but not later than twenty-four hours after the change
is effected;]

1

(g)

where upon receiving actual knowledge under clause (d), on a voluntary basis
on violation of clause (b), or on the basis of grievances received under sub-rule
(2), any information has been removed or access to which has been disabled, the
intermediary shall, without vitiating the evidence in any manner, preserve such
information and associated records for one hundred and eighty days for
investigation purposes, or for such longer period as may be required by the court
or by Government agencies who are lawfully authorised;

(h)

where an intermediary collects information from a user for registration on the
computer resource, it shall retain his information for a period of one hundred
and eighty days after any cancellation or withdrawal of his registration, as the
case may be;

(i)

the intermediary shall take all reasonable measures to secure its computer
resource and information contained therein following the reasonable security
practices and procedures as prescribed in the Information Technology
(Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal
Information) Rules, 2011;

(j)

the intermediary shall, as soon as possible, but not later than seventy two hours
3
[and in case of an online gaming intermediary who enables the users to access
any permissible online real money game not later than twenty-four hours] of the
receipt of an order, provide information under its control or possession, or
assistance to the Government agency which is lawfully authorised for
investigative or protective or cyber security activities, for the purposes of
verification of identity, or for the prevention, detection, investigation, or

Subs. by G.S.R. 794(E), dated 28.10.2022 (w.e.f. 28.10.2022), for clause (f). Clause (f), before substitution stood
as under:
“(f) the intermediary shall periodically, and at least once in a year, inform its users of its rules and regulations,
privacy policy or user agreement or any change in the rules and regulations, privacy policy or user
agreement, as the case may be;”.
2
Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.
3
Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.

prosecution, of offences under any law for the time being in force, or for cyber
security incidents:
Provided that any such order shall be in writing stating clearly the
purpose of seeking information or assistance, as the case may be;
(k)

the intermediary shall not knowingly deploy or install or modify technical
configuration of computer resource or become party to any act that may change
or has the potential to change the normal course of operation of the computer
resource than what it is supposed to perform thereby circumventing any law for
the time being in force:
Provided that the intermediary may develop, produce, distribute or
employ technological means for the purpose of performing the acts of securing
the computer resource and information contained therein;

(l)

1

the intermediary shall report cyber security incidents and share related
information with the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team in
accordance with the policies and procedures as mentioned in the Information
Technology (The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team and Manner of
Performing Functions and Duties) Rules, 2013.

[(m) the intermediary shall take all reasonable measures to ensure accessibility of its
services to users along with reasonable expectation of due diligence, privacy
and transparency;

(n)

the intermediary shall respect all the rights accorded to the citizens under the
Constitution, including in the articles 14, 19 and 21.]

(2) Grievance redressal mechanism of intermediary: (a) The intermediary shall prominently
publish on its website, mobile based application or both, as the case may be, the name of the
Grievance Officer and his contact details as well as mechanism by which a user or a victim
may make complaint against violation of the provisions of this rule or 2[sub-rules (11) to (13)
of rule 4, or in respect of] any other matters pertaining to the computer resources made available
by it, and the Grievance Officer shall3

[(i) acknowledge the complaint within twenty-four hours and resolve such complaint
within a period of fifteen days from the date of its receipt:
Provided that the complaint in the nature of request for removal of information or
communication link relating to clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3, except sub-clauses
(i), (iv) and 4[(xi)], shall be acted upon as expeditiously as possible and shall be
resolved within seventy-two hours of such reporting;
Provided further that appropriate safeguards may be developed by the
intermediary to avoid any misuse by users;]

1

Ins. by G.S.R. 794(E), dated 28.10.2022 (w.e.f. 28.10.2022).
Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.
3
Subs. by G.S.R. 794(E), dated 28.10.2022, for sub-clause (i) (w.e.f. 28.10.2022). Sub-clause (i), before
substitution, stood as under:
“(i) acknowledge the complaint within twenty four hours and dispose off such complaint within a period of
fifteen days from the date of its receipt;”.
4
Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for “(ix)”.
2

(ii) receive and acknowledge any order, notice or direction issued by the Appropriate
Government, any competent authority or a court of competent jurisdiction.
[Explanation.—In this rule, “prominently publish” shall mean publishing in a clearly visible
manner on the home page of the website or the home screen of the mobile based application,
or both, as the case may be, or on a web page or an app screen directly accessible from the
home page or home screen.]
1

(b) The intermediary shall, within twenty-four hours from the receipt of a complaint made by
an individual or any person on his behalf under this sub-rule, in relation to any content which
is prima facie in the nature of any material which exposes the private area of such individual,
shows such individual in full or partial nudity or shows or depicts such individual in any sexual
act or conduct, or is in the nature of impersonation in an electronic form, including artificially
morphed images of such individual, take all reasonable and practicable measures to remove or
disable access to such content which is hosted, stored, published or transmitted by it:
(c) The intermediary shall implement a mechanism for the receipt of complaints under clause
(b) of this sub-rule which may enable the individual or person to provide details, as may be
necessary, in relation to such content or communication link.
2

[3A. Appeal to Grievance Appellate Committee(s).—(1) The Central Government shall, by
notification, establish one or more Grievance Appellate Committees within three months from
the date of commencement of the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and
Digital Media Ethics Code) Amendment Rules, 2022.
(2) Each Grievance Appellate Committee shall consist of a chairperson and two whole time
members appointed by the Central Government, of which one shall be a member ex-officio and
two shall be independent members.
(3) 3[Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Grievance Officer or whose grievance
is not resolved within the period specified for resolution in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of subrule (2) of rule 3 or clause (b) of sub-rule (2) of rule 3 or sub-rule (11) of rule 4A, as the case
may be,] may prefer an appeal to the Grievance Appellate Committee within a period of thirty
days from the date of receipt of communication from the Grievance Officer.
(4) The Grievance Appellate Committee shall deal with such appeal expeditiously and shall
make an endeavour to resolve the appeal finally within thirty calendar days from the date of
receipt of the appeal.
(5) While dealing with the appeal if the Grievance Appellate Committee feels necessary, it may
seek assistance from any person having requisite qualification, experience and expertise in the
subject matter.
(6) The Grievance Appellate Committee shall adopt an online dispute resolution mechanism
wherein the entire appeal process, from filing of appeal to the decision thereof, shall be
conducted through digital mode.

1

Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.
Ins. by G.S.R. 794(E), dated 28.10.2022 (w.e.f. 28.10.2022).
3
Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for “Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Grievance Officer”.
2

(7) Every order passed by the Grievance Appellate Committee shall be complied with by the
intermediary concerned 1[or the online gaming self-regulatory body concerned, as the case may
be,] and a report to that effect shall be uploaded on its website.]
4. Additional due diligence to be observed by significant social media intermediary 2[and
online gaming intermediary].—(1) In addition to the due diligence observed under rule 3, a
significant social media 3[intermediary, within three months from the date of notification of the
threshold under clause (v) of sub-rule (1) of rule 2, and an online gaming intermediary that
enables the users to access any permissible online real money game, shall] observe the
following additional due diligence while discharging its duties, namely:—
(a)

appoint a Chief Compliance Officer who shall be responsible for ensuring
compliance with the Act and rules made thereunder and shall be liable in any
proceedings relating to any relevant third-party information, data or
communication link made available or hosted by that intermediary where he fails
to ensure that such intermediary observes due diligence while discharging its duties
under the Act and rules made thereunder:
Provided that no liability under the Act or rules made thereunder may
be imposed on such significant social media intermediary 4[or such online gaming
intermediary] without being given an opportunity of being heard.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause “Chief Compliance Officer” means
a key managerial personnel or such other senior employee of a significant social
media intermediary 5[or an online gaming intermediary, as the case may be,] who
is resident in India;

(b)

6

[Explanation.—In this clause, “nodal contact person” means the employee of—
(i) a significant social media intermediary, other than its Chief Compliance
Officer; or
(ii) an online gaming intermediary,
who is resident in India;]

(c)

1

appoint a nodal contact person for 24x7 coordination with law enforcement
agencies and officers to ensure compliance to their orders or requisitions made in
accordance with the provisions of law or rules made thereunder.

appoint a Resident Grievance Officer, who shall, subject to clause (b), be
responsible for the functions referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 3.

Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.
Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.
3
Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for “intermediary shall, within three months from the date of notification
of the threshold under clause (v) of sub-rule (1) of rule 2,”.
4
Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.
5
Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.
6
Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for the existing Explanation. The Explanation, before substitution, stood
as under:
“Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause “nodal contact person” means the employee of a significant
social media intermediary, other than the Chief Compliance Officer, who is resident in India;”.
2

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “Resident Grievance Officer”
means the employee of a significant social media 1[intermediary or an online
gaming intermediary, as the case may be,] who is resident in India;
(d)

publish periodic compliance report every month mentioning the details of
complaints received and action taken 2[thereon, and, in respect of a significant
social media intermediary,] the number of specific communication links or parts of
information that the intermediary has removed or disabled access to in pursuance
of any proactive monitoring conducted by using automated tools or any other
relevant information as may be specified;

(2) A significant social media intermediary providing services primarily in the nature of
messaging shall enable the identification of the first originator of the information on its
computer resource as may be required by a judicial order passed by a court of competent
jurisdiction or an order passed under section 69 by the Competent Authority as per the
Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for interception, monitoring and
decryption of information) Rules, 2009, which shall be supported with a copy of such
information in electronic form:
Provided that an order shall only be passed for the purposes of prevention, detection,
investigation, prosecution or punishment of an offence related to the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, or public order, or of
incitement to an offence relating to the above or in relation with rape, sexually explicit material
or child sexual abuse material, punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less than five
years:
Provided further that no order shall be passed in cases where other less intrusive means
are effective in identifying the originator of the information:
Provided also that in complying with an order for identification of the first originator,
no significant social media intermediary shall be required to disclose the contents of any
electronic message, any other information related to the first originator, or any information
related to its other users:
Provided also that where the first originator of any information on the computer
resource of an intermediary is located outside the territory of India, the first originator of that
information within the territory of India shall be deemed to be the first originator of the
information for the purpose of this clause.
(3) A significant social media intermediary that provides any service with respect to an
information or transmits that information on behalf of another person on its computer
resource—

1
2

(a)

for direct financial benefit in a manner that increases its visibility or prominence,
or targets the receiver of that information; or

(b)

to which it owns a copyright, or has an exclusive license, or in relation with which
it has entered into any contract that directly or indirectly restricts the publication

Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for “intermediary,”.
Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for “thereon, and”.

or transmission of that information through any means other than those provided
through the computer resource of such social media intermediary,
shall make that information clearly identifiable to its users as being advertised, marketed,
sponsored, owned, or exclusively controlled, as the case may be, or shall make it identifiable
as such in an appropriate manner.
(4) A significant social media intermediary shall endeavour to deploy technology-based
measures, including automated tools or other mechanisms to proactively identify information
that depicts any act or simulation in any form depicting rape, child sexual abuse or conduct,
whether explicit or implicit, or any information which is exactly identical in content to
information that has previously been removed or access to which has been disabled on the
computer resource of such intermediary under clause (d) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3, and shall
display a notice to any user attempting to access such information stating that such information
has been identified by the intermediary under the categories referred to in this sub-rule:
Provided that the measures taken by the intermediary under this sub-rule shall be
proportionate having regard to the interests of free speech and expression, privacy of users on
the computer resource of such intermediary, including interests protected through the
appropriate use of technical measures:
Provided further that such intermediary shall implement mechanisms for appropriate
human oversight of measures deployed under this sub-rule, including a periodic review of any
automated tools deployed by such intermediary:
Provided also that the review of automated tools under this sub-rule shall evaluate the
automated tools having regard to the accuracy and fairness of such tools, the propensity of bias
and discrimination in such tools and the impact on privacy and security of such tools.
(5) 1[A significant social media intermediary and an online gaming intermediary who enables
the users to access any permissible online real money game] shall have a physical contact
address in India published on its website, mobile based application or both, as the case may be,
for the purposes of receiving the communication addressed to it.
(6) 2[A significant social media intermediary and an online gaming intermediary who enables
the users to access any permissible online real money game] shall implement an appropriate
mechanism for the receipt of complaints under sub-rule (2) of rule 3 and grievances in relation
to the violation of provisions under this rule, which shall enable the complainant to track the
status of such complaint or grievance by providing a unique ticket number for every complaint
or grievance received by such intermediary:
Provided that such intermediary shall, to the extent reasonable, provide such
complainant with reasons for any action taken or not taken by such intermediary in pursuance
of the complaint or grievance received by it.
(7) 3[A significant social media intermediary and an online gaming intermediary who enables
the users to access any permissible online real money game] shall enable users who register for
their services from India, or use their services in India, to voluntarily verify their accounts by

Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for “The significant social media intermediary”.
Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for “The significant social media intermediary”.
3
Subs. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023 for “The significant social media intermediary”.
1
2

using any appropriate mechanism, including the active Indian mobile number of such users,
and where any user voluntarily verifies their account, such user shall be provided with a
demonstrable and visible mark of verification, which shall be visible to all users of the service:
Provided that the information received for the purpose of verification under this subrule shall not be used for any other purpose, unless the user expressly consents to such use.
(8) Where a significant social media intermediary removes or disables access to any
information, data or communication link, under clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3 on its own
accord, such intermediary shall,—
(a)
ensure that prior to the time at which such intermediary removes or disables
access, it has provided the user who has created, uploaded, shared, disseminated,
or modified information, data or communication link using its services with a
notification explaining the action being taken and the grounds or reasons for
such action;
(b)
ensure that the user who has created, uploaded, shared, disseminated, or
modified information using its services is provided with an adequate and
reasonable opportunity to dispute the action being taken by such intermediary
and request for the reinstatement of access to such information, data or
communication link, which may be decided within a reasonable time;
(c)
ensure that the Resident Grievance Officer of such intermediary maintains
appropriate oversight over the mechanism for resolution of any disputes raised
by the user under clause (b).
(9) The Ministry may call for such additional information from any significant social media
intermediary as it may consider necessary for the purposes of this part.
1

[(10) An online gaming intermediary who enables access to its users to any permissible online
real money game, shall display a demonstrable and visible mark of verification by an online
gaming self-regulatory body on such permissible online real money game.
(11) While informing the users of its rules and regulations, privacy policy, terms of service and
user agreements under clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of rule 3, an online gaming intermediary who
enables the users to access any permissible online real money game, shall include the following
information in respect of every such online games, namely:—
(a) the policy related to withdrawal or refund of the deposit made with the expectation
of earning winnings, the manner of determination and distribution of such
winnings, and the fees and other charges payable by the user;
(b) the know-your-customer procedure followed by it for verifying the identity of the
users of such online game;
(c) the measures taken for protection of deposit made by a user for such online game;
and
(d) the framework referred to in rule 4A, relating to such online game.
(12) An online gaming intermediary shall, before accepting any deposit in cash or kind from
any user for a permissible online real money game, identify such user and verify his identity:
Provided that the procedure required to be followed by an entity regulated by the
Reserve Bank of India for identification and verification of a customer at the commencement
1

Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.

of an account-based relationship shall apply, mutatis mutandis, in identification and
verification of the users of such online gaming intermediary.
(13) An online gaming intermediary who enables the users to access any permissible online
real money game shall not itself finance by way of credit or enable financing to be offered by
third party for the purpose of playing such online game.]
1

[4A. Verification of online real money game.—(1) The Ministry may, by a notification in
the Official Gazette, designate as many online gaming self-regulatory bodies as it may consider
necessary for the purposes of verifying an online real money game as a permissible online real
money game under these rules.
(2) An entity which fulfils the following criteria may apply to the Ministry for designation as
an online gaming self-regulatory body, namely:—
(a) the entity is a company registered under section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of
2013);
(b) its membership is representative of the gaming industry;
(c) its members have been offering and promoting online games in a responsible manner;
(d) its Board of Directors is comprised of individuals of repute and do not have any conflict
of interest and possess special knowledge or practical experience suitable for the
performance of the functions of such self-regulatory body, and consists of—
(i)
an individual having special knowledge of or practical experience in the
online gaming industry;
(ii)
an individual having experience in promoting the interests of users of
online games;
(iii)
an educationist;
(iv)
an expert in the field of psychology or mental health or such other relevant
field;
(v)
an individual having special knowledge of or practical experience in the
field of information and communications technology;
(vi)
an individual who is or has been a member or officer of an organisation
dealing with the protection of child rights;
(vii)
an individual having practical experience in the field of public policy or
public administration or law enforcement or public finance or other
relevant field, to be nominated by the Ministry; and
(viii) such other individuals as may be appointed with the previous approval of
the Ministry;
(e) its memorandum of association and articles of association contain provisions relating
to—
(i)
the performance of its functions under these rules, including the redressal
of grievances under sub-rule (11), in a manner free from conflict of
interest and at arm’s length from its members;
(ii)
the disclosure and reporting by and accountability of its members in
relation to the online games verified by such body;

1

Ins. by G.S.R. 275(E), dated 6.4.2023.

(iii)

the clear and relevant criteria, consistent with these rules, for the
acceptance and continuation of a person as its member, and for revoking
or suspending such membership after giving such person an opportunity
of being heard; and
(iv)
the requirement that the amendment in the memorandum of association
and articles of association in relation to any matter referred to in subclauses (i), (ii) or (iii) is carried out with the previous approval of the
Ministry; and
(f) the entity has sufficient capacity, including financial capacity, to perform its functions
as an online gaming self-regulatory body under these rules.
(3) The online gaming self-regulatory body, upon an application made to it by its member in
respect of an online real money game, may declare such online real money game as permissible
online real money game, if, after making such inquiry as it deems fit, it is satisfied that—
(a) the online real money game does not involve wagering on any outcome; and
(b) the online gaming intermediary and such online game is in compliance with the
provisions of rules 3 and 4, the provisions of any law relating to the age at which an
individual is competent to enter into a contract, and the framework made by the online
gaming self-regulatory body under sub-rule (8):
Provided that an online gaming self-regulatory body may, initially rely upon the
information furnished by the applicant for verification of the online real money game and
declare such game as a permissible online real money game for a period not exceeding three
months:
Provided further that the online gaming self-regulatory body shall endeavour to
complete the inquiry within the said period of three months and, upon its completion, either
declare the online real money game as a permissible online real money game or inform the
applicant in writing with the reasons thereof that such online game does not meet the
requirements under these rules.
(4) The online gaming self-regulatory body shall publish and maintain on its website, mobile
based application or both, at all times, an updated list of all permissible online real money
games verified under sub-rule (3), along with the details of such online games including the
details of the applicant, the dates and period of validity of the verification, the reasons of such
verification and the details of the suspension or revocation, if any, of verification of any online
real money game.
(5) Every online gaming self-regulatory body shall publish and maintain on its website, mobile
based application or both, at all times, an updated list of all its members, whether present or
former, the dates of their acceptance as member, their corporate or business-related identity
number and other details, and the details of suspension or revocation of membership of any
member.
(6) The online gaming self-regulatory body may, at any time, after giving the applicant member
an opportunity of being heard and for reasons to be communicated in writing, suspend or
revoke the verification, if it is satisfied that the online real money game verified by it is not in
compliance with the provisions of these rules.

(7) The online real money game verified under sub-rule (3), and the online gaming
intermediary which enables access to such online real money game, shall display a
demonstrable and visible mark of such verification stating that the online real money game is
verified by the online gaming self-regulatory body as a permissible online real money game
under these rules.
(8) The online gaming self-regulatory body shall prominently publish on its website, mobile
based application or both, as the case may be, a framework for verifying an online real money
game, which, among other things, includes the following, namely:—
(a) the measures to ensure that such online real money game is not against the interests of
sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign
States and public order;
(b) the safeguards against user harm, including self-harm and psychological harm;
(c) the measures to safeguard children, including measures for parental or access control
and classifying online games through age-rating mechanism, based on the nature and
type of content; and
(d) the measures to safeguard users against the risk of gaming addiction, financial loss and
financial fraud, including repeated warning messages at higher frequency beyond a
reasonable duration for a gaming session and provision to enable a user to exclude
himself upon user-defined limits being reached for time or money spent.
(9) The Ministry may, if it considers it necessary, by a notice in writing, require an online
gaming self-regulatory body to furnish to the Ministry or disclose on such body’s website or
mobile based application or both, such information as the Ministry may specify in the notice.
(10) Before issuing a direction under section 69A of the Act in respect of a permissible online
real money game, the Central Government may take into consideration the details published
by an online gaming self-regulatory body under sub-rule (4).
(11) Every online gaming self-regulatory body shall prominently publish on its website, mobile
based application or both, the framework for redressal of grievances and the contact details of
the Grievance Officer to which an applicant aggrieved by a decision of such body with respect
to verification may make a complaint in respect of any matter related to such online real money
game or verification which shall be acknowledged by the Grievance Officer within twentyfour hours and resolved within a period of fifteen days from the date of its receipt.
(12) Where the Ministry is of the view that any verification of a permissible online real money
game by an online gaming self-regulatory body is not in conformity with these rules, it may,
after giving such body an opportunity of being heard, communicate, in writing, the fact of such
non-conformity to that body and direct it to take measures to rectify the same.
(13) The Ministry may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, after giving the online
gaming self-regulatory body an opportunity of being heard, by order, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, suspend or revoke the designation of such body:
Provided that the Ministry may, in the interest of the users of any online game that was
verified by such body at the same time or at any subsequent time, give such interim directions

as it may deem necessary to any intermediary or class of intermediaries regarding enabling its
users to access such online game.
(14) In this rule, ‘prominently publish’ shall mean publishing in a clearly visible manner on
the home page of the website or the home screen of the mobile based application, or both, as
the case may be, or on a web page or an app screen directly accessible from the home page or
home screen.
4B. Applicability of certain obligations after an initial period.—The obligations under rules
3 and 4 shall not apply in relation to online games until the expiry of a period of three months
from the date on which at least three online gaming self-regulatory bodies have been designated
under rule 4A:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiry of the said
period of three months, by a notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the obligations
under rules 3 and 4 shall apply in relation to an online game from such date as may be specified
in the notification.
4C. Obligations in relation to online game other than online real money game.—(1) If the
Central Government considers it necessary so to do in the interest of the sovereignty and
integrity of India or security of the State or friendly relations with foreign States or public
order, or preventing user harm, it may, by a notification in the Official Gazette, for reasons to
be recorded in writing,—
(a) direct that an intermediary in respect of such online game, shall observe, mutatis
mutandis, the obligations under sub-clauses (ix) and (x) of clause (b) of sub-rule
(1) of rule 3and sub-rules (1), (5), (6), (7), (10) and clause (d) of sub-rule (11) of
rule 4 as if it is a permissible online real money game; and
(b) specify the period within which the online gaming intermediary which enables
access to such online game shall observe the obligations referred to in clause (a).
(2) Where an online game is notified under sub-rule (1), the provisions of rule 4A shall apply
as they apply to a permissible online real money game.
Explanation.—In this rule, “user harm” means any effect which is detrimental to users.]
5. Additional due diligence to be observed by an intermediary in relation to news and
current affairs content.—In addition to adherence to rules 3 and 4, as may be applicable, an
intermediary shall publish, on an appropriate place on its website, mobile based application or
both, as the case may be, a clear and concise statement informing publishers of news and
current affairs content that in addition to the common terms of service for all users, such
publishers shall furnish the details of their user accounts on the services of such intermediary
to the Ministry as may be required under rule 18:
Provided that an intermediary may provide such publishers who have provided
information under rule 18 with a demonstrable and visible mark of verification as being
publishers, which shall be visible to all users of the service.
Explanation.—This rule relates only to news and current affairs content and shall be
administered by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
6. Notification of other intermediary.—(1) The Ministry may by order, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, require any intermediary, which is not a significant social media

intermediary, to comply with all or any of the obligations mentioned under rule 4, if the services
of that intermediary permits the publication or transmission of information in a manner that
may create a material risk of harm to the sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the
State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order.
(2) The assessment of material risk of harm referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be made having
regard to the nature of services of such intermediary, and if those services permit,—
(a) interaction between users, notwithstanding, whether it is the primary purpose of that
intermediary; and
(b) the publication or transmission of information to a significant number of other users
as would be likely to result in widespread dissemination of such information.
(3) An order under this rule may be issued in relation to a specific part of the computer
resources of any website, mobile based application or both, as the case may be, if such specific
part is in the nature of an intermediary:
Provided that where such order is issued, an entity may be required to comply with all
or any of the obligations mentions under rule 4, in relation to the specific part of its computer
resource which is in the nature of an intermediary.
7. Non-observance of Rules.—Where an intermediary fails to observe these rules, the
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 79 of the Act shall not be applicable to such
intermediary and the intermediary shall be liable for punishment under any law for the time
being in force including the provisions of the Act and the Indian Penal Code.
PART III
CODE OF ETHICS AND PROCEDURE AND SAFEGUARDS IN RELATION TO
DIGITALMEDIA
8. Application of this Part.—(1) The rules made under this Part shall apply to the following
persons or entities, namely:—
(a) publishers of news and current affairs content;
(b) publishers of online curated content; and
shall be administered by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India,
which shall be referred to in this Part as the “Ministry”:
Provided that the rules made under this Part shall apply to intermediaries for the
purposes of rules 15 and 16;
(2) the rules made under this Part shall apply to the publishers, where,—
(a) such publisher operates in the territory of India; or
(b) such publisher conducts systematic business activity of making its content
available in India.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this rule,—
(a) a publisher shall be deemed to operate in the territory of India where such
publisher has a physical presence in the territory of India;

(b) “systematic activity” shall mean any structured or organised activity that involves
an element of planning, method, continuity or persistence.
(3) The rules made under this Part shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions
of any other law for the time being in force and any remedies available under such laws
including the Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Blocking of Access of
Information by the Public) Rules, 2009.
9. Observance and adherence to the Code.—(1) A publisher referred to in rule 8 shall
observe and adhere to the Code of Ethics laid down in the Appendix annexed to these rules.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, a publisher referred to in rule 8 who
contravenes any law for the time being in force, shall also be liable for consequential action as
provided in such law which has so been contravened.
(3) For ensuring observance and adherence to the Code of Ethics by publishers operating in the
territory of India, and for addressing the grievances made in relation to publishers under this
Part, there shall be a three-tier structure as under—
(a)

Level I - Self-regulation by the publishers;

(b)

Level II – Self-regulation by the self-regulating bodies of the publishers;

(c)

Level III - Oversight mechanism by the Central Government.

CHAPTER I
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM
10. Furnishing and processing of grievance.—(1) Any person having a grievance regarding
content published by a publisher in relation to the Code of Ethics may furnish his grievance on
the grievance mechanism established by the publisher under rule 11.
(2) The publisher shall generate and issue an acknowledgement of the grievance for the benefit
of the complainant within twenty-four hours of it being furnished for information and record.
(3) The manner of grievance redressal shall have the following arrangement–
(a) the publisher shall address the grievance and inform the complainant of its decision
within fifteen days of the registration of the grievance;
(b) if the decision of the publisher is not communicated to the complainant within the
stipulated fifteen days, the grievance shall be escalated to the level of the self–
regulating body of which such publisher is a member.
(c) where the complainant is not satisfied with the decision of the publisher, it may
prefer to appeal to the self-regulating body of which such publisher is a member
within fifteen days of receiving such a decision.
(d) the self-regulating body shall address the grievance referred to in clauses (b) and
(c), and convey its decision in the form of a guidance or advisory to the publisher,
and inform the complainant of such decision within a period of fifteen days.

(e) where the complainant is not satisfied with the decision of the self-regulating body,
it may, within fifteen days of such decision, prefer an appeal to the Oversight
Mechanism referred to in rule 13 for resolution.
CHAPTER II
SELF REGULATING MECHANISM - LEVEL I
11. Self-Regulating mechanism at Level I.—(1) The publisher shall be the Level I of the selfregulating mechanism.
(2) A publisher shall—
(a) establish a grievance redressal mechanism and shall appoint a Grievance Officer
based in India, who shall be responsible for the redressal of grievances received by
him;
(b) display the contact details related to its grievance redressal mechanism and the
name and contact details of its Grievance Officer at an appropriate place on its
website or interface, as the case may be;
(c) ensure that the Grievance Officer takes a decision on every grievance received by
it within fifteen days, and communicate the same to the complainant within the
specified time:
(d) be a member of a self-regulating body as referred to in rule 12 and abide by its
terms and conditions.
(3) The Grievance Officer shall,—
(a) be the contact point for receiving any grievance relating to Code of Ethics;
(b) act as the nodal point for interaction with the complainant, the self-regulating body
and the Ministry.
(4) Online curated content shall be classified by the publisher of such content into the categories
referred to in the Schedule, having regard to the context, theme, tone, impact and target
audience of such content, with the relevant rating for such categories based on an assessment
of the relevant content descriptors in the manner specified in the said Schedule.
(5) Every publisher of online curated content shall display the rating of any online curated
content and an explanation of the relevant content descriptors, prominently to its users at an
appropriate place, as the case may be, in a manner that ensures that such users are aware of this
information before accessing such content.

CHAPTER III
SELF REGULATING MECHANISM – LEVEL II
12. Self-regulating body.—(1) There may be one or more self-regulatory bodies of publishers,
being an independent body constituted by publishers or their associations.
(2) The self-regulatory body referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be headed by a retired judge of the
Supreme Court, a High Court, or an independent eminent person from the field of media,
broadcasting, entertainment, child rights, human rights or such other relevant field, and have

other members, not exceeding six, being experts from the field of media, broadcasting,
entertainment, child rights, human rights and such other relevant fields.
(3) The self-regulating body shall, after its constitution in accordance with sub-rule (2), register
itself with the Ministry within a period of thirty days from the date of notification of these
rules, and where a self-regulating body is constituted after such period, within thirty days from
the date of its constitution:
Provided that before grant of registration to the self-regulating body, the Ministry shall
satisfy itself that the self-regulating body has been constituted in accordance with sub-rule (2)
and has agreed to perform the functions laid down in sub-rules (4) and (5).
(4) The self-regulating body shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) oversee and ensure the alignment and adherence by the publisher to the Code of
Ethics;
(b) provide guidance to publishers on various aspects of the Code of Ethics;
(c) address grievances which have not been resolved by publishers within the specified
period of fifteen days;
(d) hear appeals filed by the complainant against the decision of publishers;
(e) issue such guidance or advisories to such publishers as specified in sub-rule (5) for
ensuring compliance to the Code of Ethics.
(5) The self-regulating body while disposing a grievance or an appeal referred to it in sub-rule
(4) may issue following guidance or advisories to the publishers as under, namely:—
(a)

warning, censuring, admonishing or reprimanding the publisher; or

(b)

requiring an apology by the publisher; or

(c)

requiring the publisher to include a warning card or a disclaimer; or

(d)

in case of online curated content, direct the publisher to,—

(i)

reclassify ratings of relevant content;

(ii)

make appropriate modification in the content descriptor, age classification
and access control measures;

(iii) edit synopsis of relevant content; or
(e)

in case of any content where it is satisfied that there is a need for taking action to
delete or modify the content for preventing incitement to the commission of a
cognizable offence relating to public order, or in relation to the reasons
enumerated in sub-section (1) of section 69A of the Act, refer such content to the
Ministry for consideration by the Oversight Mechanism referred to in rule 13 for
appropriate action.

(6) Where the self-regulating body is of the opinion that there is no violation of the Code of
Ethics, it shall convey such decision to the complainant and such entity.
(7) Where a publisher fails to comply with the guidance or advisories of the self-regulating
body within the time specified in such guidance or advisory, the self-regulating body shall refer

the matter to the Oversight Mechanism referred to in rule 13 within fifteen days of expiry of
the specified date.
CHAPTER IV
OVERSIGHT MECHANISM — LEVEL III
13. Oversight mechanism.—(1) The Ministry shall co-ordinate and facilitate the adherence to
the Code of Ethics by publishers and self regulating bodies, develop an Oversight Mechanism,
and perform the following functions, namely:—
(a)

publish a charter for self regulating bodies, including Codes of Practices for such
bodies;

(b)

establish an Inter-Departmental Committee for hearing grievances;

(c)

refer to the Inter-Departmental Committee grievances arising out of the decision of
the self-regulating body under rule 12, or where no decision has been taken by the
self-regulating body within the specified time period, or such other complaints or
references relating to violation of Code of Ethics as it may consider necessary;

(d)

issue appropriate guidance and advisories to publishers;

(e)

issue orders and directions to the publishers for maintenance and adherence to the
Code of Ethics.

(2) The Ministry shall appoint an officer of the Ministry not below the rank of a Joint Secretary
to the Government of India, as the “Authorised Officer”, for the purposes of issuing directions
under rules 15 or 16, as the case may be.
14. Inter-Departmental Committee.—(1) The Ministry shall constitute an InterDepartmental Committee, called the Committee, consisting of representatives from the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Ministry of Women and Child Development,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology, Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Defence, and such other
Ministries and Organisations, including domain experts, that it may decide to include in the
Committee:
Provided that the Authorised Officer designated under sub-rule (2) of rule 13 shall be
the Chairperson of such Committee.
(2) The Committee shall meet periodically and hear the following complaints regarding
violation or contravention of the Code of Ethics by the entities referred to in Rule 8—
(a)

arising out of the grievances in respect of the decisions taken at the Level I or
II, including the cases where no such decision is taken within the time specified
in the grievance redressal mechanism; or

(b)

referred to it by the Ministry.

(3) Any complaint referred to the Committee, whether arising out of the grievances or referred
to it by the Ministry, shall be in writing and may be sent either by mail or fax or by e-mail
signed with electronic signature of the authorised representative of the entity referring the
grievance, and the Committee shall ensure that such reference is assigned a number which is
recorded along with the date and time of its receipt.

(4) The Ministry shall make all reasonable efforts to identify the entity referred to in Rule 8
which has created, published or hosted the content or part thereof, and where it is able to
identify such entity, it shall issue a duly signed notice to such entity to appear and submit their
reply and clarifications, if any, before the Committee.
(5) In the hearing, the Committee shall examine complaints or grievances, and may either
accept or allow such complaint or grievance, and make the following recommendations to the
Ministry, namely:—
(a)

warning, censuring, admonishing or reprimanding such entity; or

(b) requiring an apology by such entity; or
(c)

requiring such entity to include a warning card or a disclaimer; or

(d) in case of online curated content, direct a publisher to—

(i)

reclassify ratings of relevant content; or

(ii)

edit synopsis of relevant content; or

(iii) make appropriate modification in the content descriptor, age classification
and parental or access control;
(e)

delete or modify content for preventing incitement to the commission of a
cognisable offence relating to public order;

(f)

in case of content where the Committee is satisfied that there is a need for taking
action in relation to the reasons enumerated in sub-section (1) of section 69A of the
Act, it may recommend such action.

(6) The Ministry may, after taking into consideration the recommendations of the Committee,
issue appropriate orders and directions for compliance by the publisher:
Provided that no such order shall be issued without the approval of the Secretary,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India (hereinafter referred to as the
“Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting”).
15. Procedure for issuing of direction.—(1) In respect of recommendations referred to in
clauses (e) and (f) of sub-rule (5) of rule 14, the Authorised Officer shall place the matter for
consideration before the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for taking
appropriate decision.
(2) The Authorised Officer shall, on approval of the decision by the Secretary, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, direct the publisher, any agency of the Government or any
intermediary, as the case may be to delete or modify or block the relevant content and
information generated, transmitted, received, stored or hosted in their computer resource for
public access within the time limit specified in the direction:
Provided that in case the recommendation of the Authorised Officer is not approved by
the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, the Authorised Officer shall convey
the same to the Committee.
(3) A direction under this rule may be issued only in respect of a specific piece of content or
an enumerated list of content, as the case may be, and shall not require any entity to cease its
operations.

16. Blocking of information in case of emergency.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in rules 14 and 15, the Authorised Officer, in any case of emergency nature, for which no delay
is acceptable, shall examine the relevant content and consider whether it is within the grounds
referred to in sub-section (1) of section 69A of the Act and it is necessary or expedient and
justifiable to block such information or part thereof and submit a specific recommendation in
writing to the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
(2) In case of emergency nature, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting may,
if he is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient and justifiable for blocking for public access
of any information or part thereof through any computer resource and after recording reasons
in writing, as an interim measure issue such directions as he may consider necessary to such
identified or identifiable persons, publishers or intermediary in control of such computer
resource hosting such information or part thereof without giving him an opportunity of hearing.
(3) The Authorised Officer, at the earliest but not later than forty-eight hours of issue of
direction under sub-rule (2), shall bring the request before the Committee for its consideration
and recommendation.
(4) On receipt of recommendations of the Committee under sub-rule (3), the Secretary,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, shall pass the final order as regard to approval of
such request and in case the request for blocking is not approved by the Secretary, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting in his final order, the interim direction issued under sub-rule (2)
shall be revoked and the person, publisher or intermediary in control of such information shall
be accordingly, directed to unblock the information for public access.
17. Review of directions issued.—(1) The Authorised Officer shall maintain complete records
of the proceedings of the Committee, including any complaints referred to the Committee, and
shall also maintain records of recommendations made by the Committee and any directions
issued by the Authorised Officer.
(2 )The Review Committee shall meet at least once in every two months and record its findings
whether the directions of blocking of content or information issued under these rules are in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 69A of the Act and if it is of the
opinion that the directions are not in accordance with the said provisions, it may set aside the
directions and issue order for unblocking of such content or information generated, transmitted,
received, stored or hosted in a computer resource.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule, “Review Committee” shall mean the Review
Committee constituted under rule 419A of the Indian Telegraph Rules, 1951.

CHAPTER V
FURNISHING OF INFORMATION
18. Furnishing of information.—(1) A publisher of news and current affairs content and a
publisher of online curated content operating in the territory of India, shall inform the Ministry
about the details of its entity by furnishing information along with such documents as may be
specified, for the purpose of enabling communication and coordination.

(2) The information referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be furnished within a period of thirty days
of the publication of these rules, and where such publisher begins operation in the territory of
India or comes into existence after commencement of these rules, within thirty days from the
date of start of its operations in the territory of India or its coming into existence, as the case
may be.
(3) The publisher of news and current affairs content and the publisher of online curated content
shall publish periodic compliance report every month mentioning the details of grievances
received and action taken thereon.
(4) The Ministry may call for such additional information from the publisher as it may consider
necessary for the implementation of this Rule.

CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
19. Disclosure of Information.—(1) A publisher and a self-regulating body, shall make true
and full disclosure of all grievances received by it, the manner in which the grievances are
disposed of, the action taken on the grievance, the reply sent to the complainant, the orders or
directions received by it under these rules and action taken on such orders or directions.
(2) The information referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be displayed publicly and updated monthly.
(3) Subject to any law for the time being in force, the publisher shall preserve records of content
transmitted by it for a minimum period of sixty days and make it available to the self-regulating
body or the Central Government, or any other Government agency, as may be requisitioned by
them for implementation of these rules.

APPENDIX
CODE OF ETHICS
I

News and current affairs:
(i)

Norms of Journalistic Conduct of the Press Council of India under the Press
Council Act, 1978;

(ii)

Programme Code under section 5 of the Cable Television Networks Regulation)
Act, 1995;

(iii) Content which is prohibited under any law for the time being in force shall not
be published or transmitted.
II

Online curated content:

(A)

General Principles:
(a) A publisher shall not transmit or publish or exhibit any content which is prohibited
under any law for the time being in force or has been prohibited by any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(b) A publisher shall take into consideration the following factors, when deciding to
feature or transmit or publish or exhibit any content, after duly considering the
implications of any content as falling under the following categories, and shall
exercise due caution and discretion in relation to the same, namely:—
(i)

content which affects the sovereignty and integrity of India;

(ii)

content which threatens, endangers or jeopardises the security of the State;

(iii) content which is detrimental to India’s friendly relations with foreign
countries;
(iv) content which is likely to incite violence or disturb the maintenance of public
order.
(c) A publisher shall take into consideration India’s multi-racial and multi-religious
context and exercise due caution and discretion when featuring the activities,
beliefs, practices, or views of any racial or religious group.
(B)

Content Classification:
(i) All content transmitted or published or exhibited by a publisher of online curated
content shall be classified, based on the nature and type of content, into the following rating
categories, namely:—
(a) Online curated content which is suitable for children as well as people of all ages
shall be classified as “U” rating;
(b) Online curated content which is suitable for persons aged 7 years and above, and
can be viewed by a person under the age of 7 years with parental guidance, shall be
classified as “U/A 7+” rating;
(c) Online curated content which is suitable for persons aged 13 years and above, and
can be viewed by a person under the age of 13 years with parental guidance, shall
be classified as “U/A 13+” rating;

(d) Online curated content which is suitable for persons aged 16 years and above, and
can be viewed by a person under the age of 16 years with parental guidance, shall
be classified as “U/A 16+” rating; and
(e) Online curated content which is restricted to adults shall be classified as “A” rating.
(ii) The Content may be classified on the basis of.—i) Themes and messages; ii) Violence;
iii) Nudity; iv) Sex; v) Language; vi) Drug and substance abuse; and (vii) Horror as
described in the Schedule, as may be modified from time to time by the Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting.
(C) Display of Classification:
(a) The publisher of online curated content shall prominently display the classification
rating specific to each content or programme together with a content descriptor
informing the user about the nature of the content, and advising on viewer discretion
(if applicable) at the beginning of every programme enabling the user to make an
informed decision, prior to watching the programme.
(b) The publisher of online curated content making available content that is classified
as U/A 13+ or higher shall ensure that access control mechanisms, including
parental locks, are made available for such content.
(c) A publisher of online curated content which makes available content or programme
that is classified as “A” shall implement a reliable age verification mechanism for
viewership of such content.
(d) A publisher of online curated content must strive to include classification rating and
consumer advice for their programmes in any print, televised or online promotional
or publicity material and prominently display the classification rating specific to
each such content.
(D)

Restriction of access to certain curated content by a child:

Every publisher of online curated content providing access to online curated content which has
an “A” rating shall take all efforts to restrict access to such content by a child through the
implementation of appropriate access control measures.
(E)
Measures to improve accessibility of online curated content by persons with
disabilities:
Every publisher of online curated content shall, to the extent feasible, take reasonable efforts
to improve the accessibility of online curated content transmitted by it to persons with
disabilities through the implementation of appropriate access services.

SCHEDULE
Classification of any curated content shall be guided by the following sets of guidelines,
namely:—
PART I
GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR CLASSIFICATION OF FILMS AND OTHER
ENTERTAINMENT PROGRAMMES, INCLUDING WEB BASED SERIALS
There are general factors that may influence a classification decision at any level and in
connection with any issue and the following factors are elucidated which may be read along
with Part II of the Guidelines (a) Context:
Curated content may be considered in the light of the period depicted in such content and
the contemporary standards of the country and the people to which such content relates.
Therefore, the context in which an issue is presented within a film or video may be given
consideration. Factors such as the setting of a work (historical, fantasy, realistic,
contemporary etc.), the manner of presentation of the content, the apparent intention of
the content, the original production date of the content, and any special merits of the work
may influence the classification decision.
(b) Theme:
Classification decisions may take into the theme of any content but will depend
significantly on the treatment of that theme, especially the sensitivity of its presentation.
The most challenging themes (for example, drug misuse, violence, pedophilia, sex, racial
or communal hatred or violence etc.) are unlikely to be appropriate at the junior levels of
classification.
(c) Tone and impact:
Curated content may be judged in its entirety from the point of view of its overall impact.
The tone of content can be an important factor in deciding the influence it may have on
various groups of people. Thus, films/serials that have a stronger depiction of violence
may receive a higher classification.
(d) Target audience:
The classification of any content may also depend upon the target audience of the work
and the impact of the work on such audience.

PART II
ISSUE RELATED GUIDELINES
This part of the guidelines comprises the issues and concerns that apply in varying degrees to
all categories of classification and elaborates the general approach that may be taken in this
regard to the same. These concerns are listed in alphabetical order, and are to be read with the
four General Guidelines listed in Part I —

(a) Discrimination:
The categorical classification of content shall take into account the impact of a film on
matters such as caste, race, gender, religion, disability or sexuality that may arise in a
wide range of works, and the classification decision will take account of the strength or
impact of their inclusion.
(b) Psychotropic substances, liquor, smoking and tobacco:
Films or serials, etc. that as a whole portray misuse of psychotropic substances, liquor,
smoking and tobacco would qualify for a higher category of classification.
(c) Imitable behaviour:
(1)

Classification decisions may take into account any portrayal of criminal and violent
behaviour with weapons.

(2)

Portrayal of potentially dangerous behaviour that are likely to incite the
commission of any offence (including suicide, and infliction of self-harm) and that
children and young people may potentially copy, shall receive a higher
classification.

(3)

Films or serials with song and dance scenes comprising lyrics and gestures that
have sexual innuendos would receive a higher classification.

(d) Language:
(1) Language is of particular importance, given the vast linguistic diversity of our
country. The use of language, dialect, idioms and euphemisms vary from region to
region and are culture-specific. This factor has to be taken into account during the
process of classification of a work in a particular category.
(2) Language that people may find offensive includes the use of expletives. The extent
of offence may vary according to age, gender, race, background, beliefs and
expectations of the target audience from the work as well as the context, region and
language in which the word, expression or gesture is used.
(3) It is not possible to set out a comprehensive list of words, expressions or gestures
that are acceptable at each category in every Indian language. The advice at
different classification levels, therefore, provides general guidance to consider
while judging the level of classification for content, based on this guideline.
(e) Nudity:
(1) No content that is prohibited by law at the time being in force can be published or
transmitted.
(2) Nudity with a sexual context will receive a higher classification of “A”.
(f) Sex:
No content that is prohibited by law at the time being in force can be published or
transmitted. The classification of content in various ratings from U/A 16+ to “A” shall
depend upon the portrayal of non-explicit (implicit) to explicit depiction of sexual
behaviour.

(g) Violence:
Classification decisions shall take account of the degree and nature of violence in a
work.
***

THE AADHAAR (TARGETED DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL AND OTHER SUBSIDIES,
BENEFITS AND SERVICES) ACT, 2016
______
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
______
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ENROLMENT
3. Aadhaar number.
3A. Aadhaar number of children.
4. Properties of Aadhaar number.
5. Special measures for issuance of Aadhaar number to certain category of persons.
6. Update of certain information.
CHAPTER III
AUTHENTICATION
7. Proof of Aadhaar number necessary for receipt of certain subsidies, benefits and services, etc.
8. Authentication of Aadhaar number.
8A. Offline verification of Aadhaar number.
9. Aadhaar number not evidence of citizenship or domicile, etc.
10. Central Identities Data Repository.
CHAPTER IV
UNIQUE IDENTIFICATION AUTHORITYOF INDIA
11. Establishment of Authority.
12. Composition of Authority.
13. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Authority.
14. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
15. Removal of Chairperson and Members.
16. Restrictions on Chairperson or Members on employment after cessation of office.
17. Functions of Chairperson.

1

SECTIONS
18. Chief executive officer.
19. Meetings of Authority.
20. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
21. Officers and other employees of Authority.
22. Transfer of assets, liabilities of Authority.
23. Powers and functions of Authority.
23A. Power of Authority to issue directions.
CHAPTER V
GRANTS, ACCOUNTSAND AUDITAND ANNUAL REPORT
24. Grants by Central Government.
25. Fund.
26. Accounts and audit.
27. Returns and annual report, etc.
CHAPTER VI
PROTECTIONOF INFORMATION
28. Security and confidentiality of information.
29. Restriction on sharing information.
30. Biometric information deemed to be sensitive personal information.
31. Alteration of demographic information or biometric information.
32. Access to own information and records of requests for authentication.
33. Disclosure of information in certain cases.
CHAPTER VIA
CIVIL PENALTIES
33A. Penalty for failure to comply with provisions of this Act, rules, regulations and
directions.
33B. Power to adjudicate.
33C. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal.
33D. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal
33E. Appeal to Supreme Court of India.
33F. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.

2

CHAPTER VII
OFFENCESAND PENALTIES
SECTIONS

34. Penalty for impersonation at time of enrolment.
35. Penalty for impersonation of Aadhaar number holder by changing demographic information or
biometric information.
36. Penalty for impersonation.
37. Penalty for disclosing identity information.
38. Penalty for unauthorised access to the Central Identities Data Repository.
39. Penalty for tampering with data in Central Identities Data Repository.
40. Penalty for unauthorised use by requesting entity or offline verification-seeking entity.
41. Penalty for non-compliance with intimation requirements.
42. General penalty.
43. Offences by companies.
44. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India.
45. Power to investigate offences.
46. Penalties not to interfere with other punishments.
47. Cognizance of offences.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
48. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.
49. Members, officers, etc., to be public servants.
50. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
50A. Exemption from tax on income.
51. Delegation.
52. Protection of action taken in good faith.
53. Power of Central Government to make rules.
54. Power of Authority to make regulations.
55. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.
56. Application of other laws not barred.
57. [Omitted.].
58. Power to remove difficulties.
59. Savings.

3

THE AADHAAR (TARGETED DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL AND OTHER SUBSIDIES,
BENEFITS AND SERVICES) ACT, 2016
ACT NO. 18 OF 2016
[25th March, 2016.]

An Act to provide for, as a good governance, efficient, transparent, and targeted delivery of
subsidies, benefits and services, the expenditure for which is incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of India, 1 [or the Consolidated Fund of the State] to individuals residing in India
through assigning of unique identity numbers to such individuals and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Aadhaar (Targeted
Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India 2*** and save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall also
apply to any offence or contravention thereunder committed outside India by any person.
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may, be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to
the commencement of that provision.
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
[(a) “Aadhaar number” means an identification number issued to an individual under sub-section
(3) of section 3, and includes any alternative virtual identity generated under sub-section (4) of that
section;]
4

[(aa) “Aadhaar ecosystem” includes enrolling agencies, Registrars, requesting entities, offline
verification-seeking entities and any other entity or group of entities as may be specified by
regulations;]
5

(b) “Aadhaar number holder” means an individual who has been issued an Aadhaar number under
this Act;
[(ba) “Adjudicating Officer” means an Adjudicating Officer appointed under sub-section (1) of
section 33B;
4

(bb) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Appellate Tribunal referred to in sub-section (1) of section
33C;]
(c) “authentication” means the process by which the Aadhaar number alongwith demographic
information or biometric information of an individual is submitted to the Central Identities Data
Repository for its verification and such Repository verifies the correctness, or the lack thereof, on the
basis of information available with it;
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule
(w.e.f. 31-10- 2019).
3.12th September, 2016 — Sections 1 to 10, 24 to 47, vide notification No. S.O. 2927 (E), dated 12th September, 2016 see
Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, s. 3 (ii).
12th July, 2016— Sections 11 to 20, 22 and 23, 48 to 59, vide notification No. S.O. 2357 (E), dated 12 the July 2016, see
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s. 3 (ii).
25th July, 2019 — Sections1 to 30, vide notification No. S.O. 2649 (E), dated 25th July, 2019 see Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, Part II, s. 3 (ii).
4. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s, 3, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid, (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

4

(d) “authentication record” means the record of the time of authentication and identity of the
requesting entity and the response provided by the Authority thereto;
(e) “Authority” means the Unique Identification Authority of India established under sub-section
(1) of section 11;
(f) “benefit” means any advantage, gift, reward, relief, or payment, in cash or kind, provided to an
individual or a group of individuals and includes such other benefits as may be notified by the Central
Government;
(g) “biometric information” means photograph, finger print, Iris scan, or such other biological
attributes of an individual as may be specified by regulations;
(h) “Central Identities Data Repository” means a centralised database in one or more locations
containing all Aadhaar numbers issued to Aadhaar number holders along with the corresponding
demographic information and biometric information of such individuals and other information related
thereto;
(i) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under section 12;
[(ia) “child” means a person who has not completed eighteen years of age;]

1

(j) “core biometric information” means finger print, Iris scan, or such other biological attribute of
an individual as may be specified by regulations;
(k) “demographic information” includes information relating to the name, date of birth, address
and other relevant information of an individual, as may be specified by regulations for the purpose of
issuing an Aadhaar number, but shall not include race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language,
records of entitlement, income or medical history;
(l) “enrolling agency” means an agency appointed by the Authority or a Registrar, as the case
may be, for collecting demographic and biometric information of individuals under this Act;
(m) “enrolment” means the process, as may be specified by regulations, to collect demographic
and biometric information from individuals by the enrolling agencies for the purpose of issuing
Aadhaar numbers to such individuals under this Act;
(n) “identity information” in respect of an individual, includes his Aadhaar number, his biometric
information and his demographic information;
(o) “Member” includes the Chairperson and Member of the Authority appointed under section 12;
(p) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression
“notified” with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations shall be construed accordingly;
[(pa) “offline verification” means the process of verifying the identity of the Aadhaar number
holder without authentication, through such offline modes as may be specified by regulations;
1

(pb) “offline verification-seeking entity” means any entity desirous of undertaking offline
verification of an Aadhaar number holder;]
(q) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under this Act;
(r) “records of entitlement” means records of benefits, subsidies or services provided to, or
availed by, any individual under any programme;
(s) “Registrar” means any entity authorised or recognised by the Authority for the purpose of
enrolling individuals under this Act;
(t) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Authority under this Act;

1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

5

(u) “requesting entity” means an agency or person that submits the Aadhaar number, and
demographic information or biometric information, of an individual to the Central Identities Data
Repository for authentication;
(v) “resident” means an individual who has resided in India for a period or periods amounting in
all to one hundred and eighty-two days or more in the twelve months immediately preceding the date
of application for enrolment;
(w) “service” means any provision, facility, utility or any other assistance provided in any form to
an individual or a group of individuals and includes such other services as may be notified by the
Central Government;
(x) “subsidy” means any form of aid, support, grant, subvention, or appropriation, in cash or kind,
to an individual or a group of individuals and includes such other subsidies as may be notified by the
Central Government.
CHAPTER II
ENROLMENT
3. Aadhaar number.—(1) Every resident shall be entitled to obtain an Aadhaar number by
submitting his demographic information and biometric information by undergoing the process of
enrolment:
Provided that the Central Government may, from time to time, notify such other category of
individuals who may be entitled to obtain an Aadhaar number.
(2) The enrolling agency shall, at the time of enrolment, inform the individual undergoing enrolment
of the following details in such manner as may be specified by regulations, namely:—
(a) the manner in which the information shall be used;
(b) the nature of recipients with whom the information is intended to be shared during
authentication; and
(c) the existence of a right to access information, the procedure for making requests for such
access, and details of the person or department in-charge to whom such requests can be made.
(3) On receipt of the demographic information and biometric information under sub-section (1), the
Authority shall, after verifying the information, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, issue
an Aadhaar number to such individual.
1

[(4) The Aadhaar number issued to an individual under sub-section (3) shall be a twelve-digit
identification number and any alternative virtual identity as an alternative to the actual Aadhaar number
of an individual that shall be generated by the Authority in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.]
[3A. Aadhaar number of children.—(1) The enrolling agency shall, at the time of enrolment of a
child, seek the consent of the parent or guardian of the child, and inform the parent or guardian, the
details specified under sub-section (2) of section 3.
2

(2) A child who is an Aadhaar number holder may, within a period of six months of attaining the
eighteen years of age, make an application to the Authority for cancellation of his Aadhaar number, in
such manner as may be specified by regulations and the Authority shall cancel his Aadhaar number.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in section 7, a child shall not be denied any subsidy, benefit or service
under that section in case of failure to establish his identity by undergoing authentication, or furnishing

1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid, (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

6

proof of possession of Aadhaar number, or in the case of a child to whom no Aadhaar number has been
assigned, producing an application for enrolment.]
4. Properties of Aadhaar number.—(1) An Aadhaar number, issued to an individual shall not be reassigned to any other individual.
(2) An Aadhaar number shall be a random number and bear no relation to the attributes or identity of
the Aadhaar number holder.
1

[(3) Every Aadhaar number holder to establish his identity, may voluntarily use his Aadhaar number
in physical or electronic form by way of authentication or offline verification, or in such other form as
may be notified, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, voluntary use of the Aadhaar number by way of
authentication means the use of such Aadhaar number only with the informed consent of the Aadhaar
number holder.
(4) An entity may be allowed to perform authentication, if the Authority is satisfied that the requesting
entity is—
(a) compliant with such standards of privacy and security as may be specified by regulations; and
(b) (i) permitted to offer authentication services under the provisions of any other law made by
Parliament; or
(ii) seeking authentication for such purpose, as the Central Government in consultation with the
Authority, and in the interest of State, may prescribe.
(5) The Authority may, by regulations, decide whether a requesting entity shall be permitted the use of
the actual Aadhaar number during authentication or only an alternative virtual identity.
(6) Every requesting entity to whom an authentication request is made by an Aadhaar number holder
under sub-section (3) shall inform to the Aadhaar number holder of alternate and viable means of
identification and shall not deny any service to him for refusing to, or being unable to, undergo
authentication.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions, mandatory authentication of an
Aadhaar number holder for the provision of any service shall take place if such authentication is required
by a law made by Parliament.]
5. Special measures for issuance of Aadhaar number to certain category of persons.—The
Authority shall take special measures to issue Aadhaar number to women, children, senior citizens,
persons with disability, unskilled and unorganised workers, nomadic tribes or to such other persons who
do not have any permanent dwelling house and such other categories of individuals as may be specified
by regulations.
6. Update of certain information.—The Authority may require Aadhaar number holders to update
their demographic information and biometric information, from time to time, in such manner as may be
specified by regulations, so as to ensure continued accuracy of their information in the Central Identities
Data Repository.

1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 6, for Sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

7

CHAPTER III
AUTHENTICATION
7. Proof of Aadhaar number necessary for receipt of certain subsidies, benefits and services,
etc.—The Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government may, for the purpose of
establishing identity of an individual as a condition for receipt of a subsidy, benefit or service for which
the expenditure is incurred from, or the receipt therefrom forms part of, the Consolidated Fund of India,
1
[or the Consolidated Fund of State] require that such individual undergo authentication, or furnish proof
of possession of Aadhaar number or in the case of an individual to whom no Aadhaar number has been
assigned, such individual makes an application for enrolment:
Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to an individual, the individual shall be offered
alternate and viable means of identification for delivery of the subsidy, benefit or service.
8. Authentication of Aadhaar number.—(1) The Authority shall perform authentication of the
Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar number holder submitted by any requesting entity, in relation to his
biometric information or demographic information, subject to such conditions and on payment of such
fees and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) A requesting entity shall—
(a) unless otherwise provided in this Act, obtain the consent of an individual 2[or in the case of a
child obtain the consent of his parent or guardian] before collecting his identity information for the
purposes of authentication in such manner as may be specified by regulations; and
(b) ensure that the identity information of an individual is only used for submission to the Central
Identities Data Repository for authentication.
2

[Provided that the requesting entity shall, in case of failure to authenticate due to illness, injury
or infirmity owing to old age or otherwise or any technical or other reasons, provide such alternate and
viable means of identification of the individual, as may be specified by regulations.]
(3) A requesting entity shall inform, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, the individual
submitting his identity information for authentication 2[or in the case of a child, his parent or guardian],
the following details with respect to authentication, namely:—
(a) the nature of information that may be shared upon authentication;
(b) the uses to which the information received during authentication may be put by the requesting
entity; and
(c) alternatives to submission of identity information to the requesting entity.
(4) The Authority shall respond to an authentication query with a positive, negative or any other
appropriate response sharing such identity information excluding any core biometric information.
3

[8A. Offline verification of Aadhaar number.—(1) Every offline verification of an Aadhaar
number holder shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) Every offline verification-seeking entity shall, —
(a) before performing offline verification, obtain the consent of an individual, or in the case of a
child, his parent or guardian, in such manner as may be specified by regulations; and

1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 7 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid, (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid, (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

8

(b) ensure that the demographic information or any other information collected from the individual
for offline verification is only used for the purpose of such verification.
(3) An offline verification-seeking entity shall inform the individual undergoing offline verification, or
in the case of a child, his parent or guardian, the following details with respect to offline verification, in
such manner as may be specified by regulations, namely:—
(a) the nature of information that may be shared upon offline verification;
(b) the uses to which the information received during offline verification may be put by the offline
verification-seeking entity; and
(c) alternatives to submission of information requested for, if any.
(4) No offline verification-seeking entity shall—
(a) subject an Aadhaar number holder to authentication;
(b) collect, use, or store an Aadhaar number or biometric information of any individual for any
purpose;
(c) take any action contrary to any obligation on it as may be specified by regulations.]
9. Aadhaar number not evidence of citizenship or domicile, etc.—The Aadhaar number or the
authentication thereof shall not, by itself, confer any right of, or be proof of, citizenship or domicile in
respect of an Aadhaar number holder.
10. Central Identities Data Repository.—The Authority may engage one or more entities to
establish and maintain the Central Identities Data Repository and to perform any other functions as may
be specified by regulations.
CHAPTER IV
UNIQUE IDENTIFICATION AUTHORITYOF INIDA
11. Establishment of Authority.—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an
Authority to be known as the Unique Identification Authority of India to be responsible for the processes
of enrolment and authentication and perform such other functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property,
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be in New Delhi.
(4) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish its offices at
other places in India.
12. Composition of Authority.—The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson, appointed on parttime or full-time basis, two part-time Members, and the chief executive officer who shall be MemberSecretary of the Authority, to be appointed by the Central Government.
13.Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Authority.—The Chairperson
and Members of the Authority shall be persons of ability and integrity having experience and knowledge
of at least ten years in matters relating to technology, governance, law, development, economics, finance,
management, public affairs or administration.
14. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.—(1) The
Chairperson and the Members appointed under this Act shall hold office for a term of three years from the
date on which they assume office and shall be eligible for re-appointment:

9

Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chairperson or Member after he has attained the age
of sixty-five years.
(2) The Chairperson and every Member shall, before entering office, make and subscribe to, an oath
of office and of secrecy, in such form and in such manner and before such Authority as may be
prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Chairperson or Member may—
(a) relinquish his office, by giving in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not less than
thirty days; or
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 15.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the
Chairperson and allowances or remuneration payable to part-time Members shall be such as may be
prescribed.
15. Removal of Chairperson and Members.—(1) The Central Government may remove from
office, the Chairperson, or a Member, who—
(a) is, or at any time has been adjudged as insolvent;
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or, as the case may
be, a Member;
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves
moral turpitude;
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as
the Chairperson or, as the case may be, a Member; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to render his
continuance in office detrimental to the public interest.
(2) The Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed under clause (b), clause (d) or clause (e) of
sub-section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
16. Restrictions on Chairperson or Members on employment after cessation of office.—The
Chairperson or a Member on ceasing to hold office for any reason, shall not, without previous approval of
the Central Government,—
(a) accept any employment in, or be connected with the management of any organisation,
company or any other entity which has been associated with any work done or contracted out by the
Authority, whether directly or indirectly, during his tenure as Chairperson or Member, as the case
may be, for a period of three years from the date on which he ceases to hold office:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any employment under the Central
Government or a State Government or local authority or in any statutory authority or any corporation
established by or under any Central, State or provincial Act or a Government Company, as defined in
clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);
(b) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in connection with any specific proceeding
or transaction or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a party and with respect to which the
Chairperson or such Member had, before cessation of office, acted for or provided advice to, the
Authority;
(c) give advice to any person using information which was obtained in his capacity as the
Chairperson or a Member and being unavailable to or not being able to be made available to the
public; or
(d) enter, for a period of three years from his last day in office, into a contract of service with,
accept an appointment to a board of directors of, or accept an offer of employment with, an entity
with which he had direct and significant official dealings during his term of office.

10

17. Functions of Chairperson.—The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Authority,
and without prejudice to any provision of this Act, exercise and discharge such other powers and
functions of the Authority as may be prescribed.
18. Chief executive officer.—(1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Authority, not below
the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India, to be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The chief executive officer shall be the legal representative of the Authority and shall be
responsible for—
(a) the day-to-day administration of the Authority;
(b) implementing the work programmes and decisions adopted by the Authority;
(c) drawing up of proposal for the Authority's decisions and work programmes;
(d) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution of the budget of
the Authority; and
(e) performing such other functions, or exercising such other powers, as may be specified by
regulations.
(3) Every year, the chief executive officer shall submit to the Authority for approval—
(a) a general report covering all the activities of the Authority in the previous year;
(b) programmes of work;
(c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and
(d) the budget for the coming year.
(4) The chief executive officer shall have administrative control over the officers and other employees
of the Authority.
19. Meetings of Authority.—(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, including quorum at such
meetings, as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, the senior
most Member shall preside over the meetings of the Authority.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority
of votes by the Members present and voting and in the event of anequality of votes, the Chairperson or in
his absence the presiding Member shall have a casting vote.
(4) All decisions of the Authority shall be signed by the Chairperson or any other Member or the
Member-Secretary authorised by the Authority in this behalf.
(5) If any Member, who is a director of a company and who as such director, has any direct or
indirect pecuniary interest in any manner coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Authority, he
shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of
his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Authority, and
the Member shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of the Authority with respect to that matter.
20. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.—No act or proceeding of the
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or Member of the Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.

11

1

[21. Officers and other employees of Authority.—(1) The Authority shall appoint such officers and
employees as may be required for the discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the
officers and employees of the Authority shall be such as may be specified by regulations.]
22. Transfer of assets, liabilities of Authority.—On and from the establishment of the Authority—
(a) all the assets and liabilities of the Unique Identification Authority of India, established vide
notification of the Government of India in the Planning Commission number A-43011/02/2009Admin. I, dated the 28th January, 2009, shall stand transferred to, and vested in, the Authority.
Explanation.—The assets of such Unique Identification Authority of India shall be deemed to include
all rights and powers, and all properties, whether movable or immovable, including, in particular, cash
balances, deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such properties as may be in the
possession of such Unique Identification Authority of India and all books of account and other documents
relating to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of
whatever kind;
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (a), all data and information collected during
enrolment, all details of authentication performed, debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all
contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for such Unique
Identification Authority of India immediately before that day, for or in connection with the purpose of
the said Unique Identification Authority of India, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into
or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Authority;
(c) all sums of money due to the said Unique Identification Authority of India immediately before
that day shall be deemed to be due to the Authority; and
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or
against such Unique Identification Authority of India immediately before that day may be continued
or may be instituted by or against the Authority.
23. Powers and functions of Authority.—(1) The Authority shall develop the policy, procedure and
systems for issuing Aadhaar numbers to individuals and perform authentication thereof under this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the powers and functions of the Authority, inter alia,
include—
(a) specifying, by regulations, demographic information and biometric information required for
enrolment and the processes for collection and verification thereof;
(b) collecting demographic information and biometric information from any individual seeking an
Aadhaar number in such manner as may be specified by regulations;
(c) appointing of one or more entities to operate the Central Identities Data Repository;
(d) generating and assigning Aadhaar numbers to individuals;
(e) performing authentication of Aadhaar numbers;
(f) maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the Central Identities Data
Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations;
(g) omitting and deactivating of an Aadhaar number and information relating thereto in such
manner as may be specified by regulations;
(h) specifying the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of providing or availing of
various subsidies, benefits, services and other purposes for which Aadhaar numbers may be used;

1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 10, for section 21 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

12

(i) specifying, by regulations, the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars, enrolling
agencies and service providers and revocation of appointments thereof;
(j) establishing, operating and maintaining of the Central Identities Data Repository;
(k) sharing, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, the information of Aadhaar
number holders, subject to the provisions of this Act;
(l) calling for information and records, conducting inspections, inquiries and audit of the
operations for the purposes of this Act of the Central Identities Data Repository, Registrars, enrolling
agencies and other agencies appointed under this Act;
(m) specifying, by regulations, various processes relating to data management, security protocols
and other technology safeguards under this Act;
(n) specifying, by regulations, the conditions and procedures for issuance of new Aadhaar number
to existing Aadhaar number holder;
(o) levying and collecting the fees or authorising the Registrars, enrolling agencies or other
service providers to collect such fees for the services provided by them under this Act in such manner
as may be specified by regulations;
(p) appointing such committees as may be necessary to assist the Authority in discharge of its
functions for the purposes of this Act;
(q) promoting research and development for advancement in biometrics and related areas,
including usage of Aadhaar numbers through appropriate mechanisms;
(r) evolving of, and specifying, by regulations, policies and practices for Registrars, enrolling
agencies and other service providers;
(s) setting up facilitation centres and grievance redressal mechanism for redressal of grievances of
individuals, Registrars, enrolling agencies and other service providers;
(t) such other powers and functions as may be prescribed.
(3) The Authority may,—
(a) enter into Memorandum of Understanding or agreement, as the case may be, with the Central
Government or State Governments or Union territories or other agencies for the purpose of
performing any of the functions in relation to collecting, storing, securing or processing of
information or delivery of Aadhaar numbers to individuals or performing authentication;
(b) by notification, appoint such number of Registrars, engage and authorise such agencies to
collect, store, secure, process information or do authentication or perform such other functions in
relation thereto,
as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Authority may engage such consultants, advisors and other persons as may be required for
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act on such allowances or remuneration and terms and
conditions as may be specified by contract.
1

[23A. Power of Authority to issue directions.—(1) The Authority may for the discharge of its
functions under this Act, or any rules or regulations made there under, by order, issue such directions
from time to time to any entity in the Aadhaar ecosystem, as it may consider necessary.
(2) Every direction issued under sub-section (1) shall be complied with by the entity in the Aadhaar
ecosystem to whom such direction is issued.]

1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 11 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

13

CHAPTER V
GRANTS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT
24. Grants by Central Government.—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority, grants of such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
1

[25. Fund.—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Unique Identification Authority of
India Fund and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; and
(b) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the
Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members and administrative
expenses including the salaries, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of officers and other
employees of the Authority; and
(b) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.]
26. Accounts and audit.—(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with
such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection
with the audit the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in
connection with the audit of Government accounts, and in particular, shall have the right to demand
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of
the offices of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or
any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded
annually to the Central Government by the Authority and the Central Government shall cause the audit
report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
27. Returns and annual report, etc.—(1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at
such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct,
such returns and statements and particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the Authority,
as the Central Government may from time to time require.
(2) The Authority shall prepare, once in every year, and in such form and manner and at such time as
may be prescribed, an annual report giving—
(a) a description of all the activities of the Authority for the previous years;
(b) the annual accounts for the previous year; and
(c) the programmes of work for coming year.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be laid by the Central Government, as
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.

1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 12, for section 25 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

14

CHAPTER VI
PROTECTIONOF INFORMATION
28. Security and confidentiality of information.—(1) The Authority shall ensure the security of
identity information and authentication records of individuals.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority shall ensure confidentiality of identity
information and authentication records of individuals.
(3) The Authority shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the information in the possession or
control of the Authority, including information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository, is secured
and protected against access, use or disclosure not permitted under this Act or regulations made
thereunder, and against accidental or intentional destruction, loss or damage.
(4) Without prejudice to sub-sections (1) and (2), the Authority shall—
(a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and organisational security measures;
(b) ensure that the agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons appointed or engaged for
performing any function of the Authority under this Act, have in place appropriate technical and
organisational security measures for the information; and
(c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered into with such agencies, consultants,
advisors or other persons, impose obligations equivalent to those imposed on the Authority under this
Act, and require such agencies, consultants, advisors and other persons to act only on instructions
from the Authority.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, and save as
otherwise provided in this Act, the Authority or any of its officers or other employees or any agency that
maintains the Central Identities Data Repository shall not, whether during his service or thereafter, reveal
any information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository or authentication record to anyone:
Provided that an Aadhaar number holder may request the Authority to provide access to his identity
information excluding his core biometric information in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
29. Restriction on sharing information.—(1) No core biometric information, collected or created
under this Act, shall be—
(a) shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever; or
(b) used for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar numbers and authentication under this
Act.
(2) The identity information, other than core biometric information, collected or created under this
Act may be shared only in accordance with the provisions of this Act and in such manner as may be
specified by regulations.
1

[(3) No identity information available with a requesting entity or offline verification-seeking entity
shall be—
(a) used for any purpose, other than the purposes informed in writing to the individual at the time
of submitting any information for authentication or offline verification; or
(b) disclosed for any purpose, other than purposes informed in writing to the individual at the time
of submitting any information for authentication or offline verification:
Provided that the purposes under clauses (a) and (b) shall be in clear and precise language
understandable to the individual.]

1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 13, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

15

(4) No Aadhaar number 1[, demographic information or photograph] collected or created under this
Act in respect of an Aadhaar number holder shall be published, displayed or posted publicly, except for
the purposes as may be specified by regulations.
30. Biometric information deemed to be sensitive personal information.—The biometric
information collected and stored in electronic form, in accordance with this Act and regulations made
thereunder, shall be deemed to be “electronic record” and “sensitive personal data or information”, and
the provisions contained in the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) and the rules made
thereunder shall apply to such information, in addition to, and to the extent not in derogation of the
provisions of this Act.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expressions—
(a) “electronic form” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (r) of sub-section (1)
of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);
(b) “electronic record” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (t) of sub-section
(1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);
(c) “sensitive personal data or information” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (iii) of the Explanation to section 43A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).
31. Alteration of demographic information or biometric information.—(1) In case any
demographic information of an Aadhaar number holder is found incorrect or changes subsequently, the
Aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority to alter such demographic information in his record in
the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) In case any biometric information of Aadhaar number holder is lost or changes subsequently for
any reason, the Aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority to make necessary alteration in his
record in the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(3) On receipt of any request under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the Authority may, if it is
satisfied, make such alteration as may be required in the record relating to such Aadhaar number holder
and intimate such alteration to the concerned Aadhaar number holder.
(4) No identity information in the Central Identities Data Repository shall be altered except in the
manner provided in this Act or regulations made in this behalf.
32. Access to own information and records of requests for authentication.—(1) The Authority
shall maintain authentication records in such manner and for such period as may be specified by
regulations.
(2) Every Aadhaar number holder shall be entitled to obtain his authentication record in such manner
as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The Authority shall not, either by itself or through any entity under its control, collect, keep or
maintain any information about the purpose of authentication.
33. Disclosure of information in certain cases.—(1) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or
sub-section (5) of section 28 or sub-section (2) of section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of
information, including identity information or authentication records, made pursuant to an order of a court
not inferior to that of a 2[Judge of a High Court]:
Provided that no order by the court under this sub-section shall be made without giving an
opportunity of hearing to the Authority 3[and the concerned Aadhaar number holder].
3

[Provided further that the core biometric information shall not be disclosed under this sub-section.]

(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (5) of section 28 and clause (b) of sub-section
(1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 29 shall apply in respect of any disclosure of information,
including identity information or authentication records, made in the interest of national security in
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 13, for “or core biometric information” (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “District Judge” (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
3. Ins. by s. 14, ibid, (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

16

pursuance of a direction of an officer not below the rank of 1[Secretary] to the Government of India
specially authorised in this behalf by an order of the Central Government:
Provided that every direction issued under this sub-section, shall be reviewed by an Oversight
Committee consisting of the Cabinet Secretary and the Secretaries to the Government of India in the
Department of Legal Affairs and the Department of Electronics and Information Technology, before it
takes effect:
Provided further that any direction issued under this sub-section shall be valid for a period of three
months from the date of its issue, which may be extended for a further period of three months after the
review by the Oversight Committee.
2

[CHAPTER VIA

CIVIL PENALTIES
33A. Penalty for failure to comply with provisions of this Act, rules, regulations and
directions.—(1) Where an entity in the Aadhaar ecosystem fails to comply with the provision of this Act,
the rules or regulations made there under or directions issued by the Authority under section 23A, or fails
to furnish any information, document, or return of report required by the Authority, such entity shall be
liable to a civil penalty which may extend to one crore rupees for each contravention and in case of a
continuing failure, with additional penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees for every day during
which the failure continues after the first contravention.
(2) The amount of any penalty imposed under this section, if not paid, may be recovered as if it were
an arrear of land revenue.
33B. Power to adjudicate.—(1) For the purposes of adjudication under section 33A and imposing a
penalty there under, the Authority shall appoint an officer of the Authority, who is not below the rank of a
Joint Secretary to the Government of India and possessing such qualification and experience as may be
prescribed, to be an Adjudicating Officer for holding an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) No inquiry under sub-section (1) shall be initiated except by a complaint made by the Authority.
(3) While holding an inquiry, the Adjudicating Officer shall—
(a) provide the entity in the Aadhaar ecosystem against whom complaint is made, an opportunity of
being heard;
(b) have the power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts
and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to produce any document which, in the opinion of
the Adjudicating Officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.
(4) If the Adjudicating Officer, on such inquiry, is satisfied that the entity in the Aadhaar ecosystem
has failed to comply with any provision of this Act or the rules or regulations made there under or
directions issued by the Authority under section 23A, or has failed to furnish any information, document,
or return of report required by the Authority, the Adjudicating Officer may, by order, impose such penalty
under section 33A as he thinks fit.

1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 14, for “Joint Secretary” (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
2. Ins. by s. 15, ibid, (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

17

33C. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal.—(1) The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal
established under section 14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997), shall
be Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of hearing appeals against the decision of the Adjudicating Officer
under this Act.
(2) A person or entity in the Aadhaar ecosystem aggrieved by an order of the Adjudicating Officer
under section 33B, may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal within a period of forty-five days from
the date of receipt of the order appealed against, in such form and manner and accompanied with such fee
as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of
forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (2), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties
to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming,
modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal and
to the Adjudicating Officer.
(5) Any appeal filed under sub-section (2) shall be dealt with by the Appellate Tribunal as
expeditiously as possible and every endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal within six
months from the date on which it is presented to it.
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of deciding an appeal before it, call for the records
relevant to disposing of such appeal and make such orders as it thinks fit.
33D. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal.—The provisions of sections 14-I to 14K
(both inclusive), 16 and 17 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997) shall,
mutatis mutandis, apply to the Appellate Tribunal in the discharge of its functions under this Act, as they
apply to it in the discharge of its functions under that Act.
33E. Appeal to Supreme Court of India.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) or in any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie
against any order, not being an interlocutory order, of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on any
substantial question of law arising out of such order.
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal which the parties
have consented to.
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of forty-five days from the date
of the decision or order appealed against:
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of
forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.
33F. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit
or proceeding in respect of any matter which an Adjudicating Officer appointed under this Act or the
Appellate Tribunal is empowered, by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by
any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under this Act.]

18

CHAPTER VII
OFFENCESAND PENALTIES
34. Penalty for impersonation at time of enrolment.—Whoever impersonates or attempts to
impersonate another person, whether dead or alive, real or imaginary, by providing any false demographic
information or biometric information, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
35. Penalty for impersonation of Aadhaar number holder by changing demographic
information or biometric information.—Whoever, with the intention of causing harm or mischief to an
Aadhaar number holder, or with the intention of appropriating the identity of an Aadhaar number holder
changes or attempts to change any demographic information or biometric information of an Aadhaar
number holder by impersonating or attempting to impersonate another person, dead or alive, real or
imaginary, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall
also be liable to a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
36. Penalty for impersonation.—Whoever, not being authorised to collect identity information
under the provisions of this Act, by words, conduct or demeanour pretends that he is authorised to do so,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with a fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees or with both.
37. Penalty for disclosing identity information.— Whoever, intentionally discloses, transmits,
copies or otherwise disseminates any identity information collected in the course of enrolment or
authentication to any person not authorised under this Act or regulations made thereunder or in
contravention of any agreement or arrangement entered into pursuant to the provisions of this Act, shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with a fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees or with both.
38. Penalty for unauthorised access to the Central Identities Data Repository.—Whoever, not
being authorised by the Authority, intentionally,—
(a) accesses or secures access to the Central Identities Data Repository;
(b) downloads, copies or extracts any data from the Central Identities Data Repository or stored in
any removable storage medium;
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any virus or other computer contaminant in the Central
Identities Data Repository;
(d) damages or causes to be damaged the data in the Central Identities Data Repository;
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of the access to the Central Identities Data Repository;
(f) denies or causes a denial of access to any person who is authorised to access the Central
Identities Data Repository;
(g) reveals any information in contravention of sub-section (5) of section 28, or shares, uses or
displays information in contravention of section 29 or assists any person in any of the aforementioned
acts;
(h) destroys, deletes or alters any information stored in any removable storage media or in the
Central Identities Data Repository or diminishes its value or utility or affects it injuriously by any
means; or
(i) steals, conceals, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any
computer source code used by the Authority with an intention to cause damage,

19

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years 1[ten years] and
shall also be liable to a fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expressions “computer contaminant”,
“computer virus” and “damage” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the
Explanation to section 43 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), and the expression
“computer source code” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Explanation to section 65 of the
said Act.
39. Penalty for tampering with data in Central Identities Data Repository.—Whoever, not being
authorised by the Authority, uses or tampers with the data in the Central Identities Data Repository or in
any removable storage medium with the intent of modifying information relating to Aadhaar number
holder or discovering any information thereof, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to 2[ten years] and shall also be liable to a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
3

[40. Penalty for unauthorised use by requesting entity or offline verification-seeking entity.—

Whoever,—(a) being a requesting entity, uses the identity information of an individual in
contravention of sub-section (2) of section 8; or
(b) being an offline verification-seeking entity, uses the identity information of an individual in
contravention of sub-section (2) of section 8A, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to three years or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a
company, with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.]
41. Penalty for non-compliance with intimation requirements.—Whoever, being an enrolling
agency or a requesting entity, fails to comply with the requirements of sub-section (2) of section 3 or subsection (3) of section 8, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with a
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend
to one lakh rupees or with both.
42. General penalty.—Whoever commits an offence under this Act or any rules or regulations made
thereunder for which no specific penalty is provided elsewhere than this section, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 4 [three year] or with a fine which may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees, or with both.
43. Offences by companies.—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;
and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 16 for “three years” (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
3. Subs. by s. 18, for section 40 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
4. Subs. by s. 19, for “One year” (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

20

44. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India.—(1) Subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of this Act shall apply also to any offence or contravention
committed outside India by any person, irrespective of his nationality.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the provisions of this Act shall apply to any offence or
contravention committed outside India by any person, if the act or conduct constituting the offence or
contravention involves any data in the Central Identities Data Repository.
45. Power to investigate offences.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a police officer not below the rank of Inspector of Police shall investigate
any offence under this Act.
46. Penalties not to interfere with other punishments.—No penalty imposed under this Act shall
prevent the imposition of any other penalty or punishment under any other law for the time being in force.
47. Cognizance of offences.—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under
this Act, save on a complaint made by the Authority or any officer or person authorised by it.
1

[Provided that the court may, on a complaint made by an Aadhaar number holder or individual take
cognizance of any offence punishable under section 34 or 35 or 36 or 37 or 40 or section 41.]
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall try
any offence punishable under this Act.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
48. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.—(1) If, at any time, the Central
Government is of the opinion,—
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is unable to discharge
the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the duties
imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the financial
position of the Authority or the administration of the Authority has suffered; or
(c) that a public emergency exists,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Authority for such period, not exceeding six
months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a person or persons as the President may
direct to exercise powers and discharge functions under this Act:
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable
opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed supersession and shall consider
the representations, if any, of the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1), superseding the Authority,—
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their
offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted
under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by the person or persons referred to in sub-section
(1); and
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted
under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.

1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 20 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

21

(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under
sub-section (1), the Central Government shall reconstitute the Authority by a fresh appointment of its
Chairperson and other Members and in such case any person who had vacated his office under clause (a)
of sub-section (2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for reappointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub-section (1) and a
full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid
before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
49. Members, officers, etc., to be public servants.—The Chairperson, Members, officers and other
employees of the Authority shall be deemed, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860).
50. Power of Central Government to issue directions.—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing
provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions
under this Act be bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government may give,
in writing to it, from time to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views
before any direction is given under this sub-section:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall empower the Central Government to issue
directions pertaining to technical or administrative matters undertaken by the Authority.
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.
1

[50A. Exemption from tax on income.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax
Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to tax on income,
profits or gains, the Authority shall not be liable to pay income-tax or any other tax in respect of its
income, profits or gains.]
51. Delegation.—The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any
[Member or officer] of the Authority or any other person, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be
specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power under section 54)
as it may deem necessary.
2

52. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall
lie against the Central Government or the Authority or the Chairperson or any Member or any officer, or
other employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under
this Act or the rule or regulation made thereunder.
53. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which and the authority before whom the oath of office and of secrecy
is to be subscribed by the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (2) of section 14;
3

[(aa) the purpose for which the requesting entity may be allowed by the Authority to perform
authentication under sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 4;]

1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 21 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
2. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “Member, officer” (w.e.f. 25-7-2019)
3. Ins. by s. 23, ibid, (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

22

(b) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the
Chairperson and the allowances or remuneration payable to Members of the Authority under
sub-section (4) of section 14;
(c) the other powers and functions of the Chairperson of the Authority under section 17;
(d) the other powers and functions of the Authority under clause (t) of sub-section (2) of
section 23;
(e) the form of annual statement of accounts to be prepared by Authority under sub-section (1) of
section 26;
(f) the form and the manner in which and the time within which returns and statements and
particulars are to be furnished under sub-section (1) of section 27;
(g) the form and the manner and the time at which the Authority shall furnish annual report under
sub-section (2) of section 27;
1

[(ga) the qualification and experience of, and the manner of appointment of, the Adjudicating
Officer under sub-section (1) of section 33B;
(gb) the form, manner, and fee for an appeal to be filed under sub-section (2) of section 33C;]
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be or may be made by rules.
54. Power of Authority to make regulations.—(1) The Authority may, by notification, make
regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, for carrying out the provisions of this
Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
2

[(a) the entities or group of entities in the Aadhaar ecosystem under clause (aa), the biometric
information under clause (g) and the demographic information under clause (k), the process of
collecting demographic information and biometric information from the individuals by enrolling
agencies under clause (m), and the modes of offline verification of Aadhaar number holder under
clause (pa) of section 2;]
(b) the manner of verifying the demographic information and biometric information for issue of
Aadhaar number under sub-section (3) of section 3;
3

[(ba) the manner of generating an alternative virtual identity under sub-section (4) of section 3;

(bb) the manner in which cancellation of an Aadhaar number may be carried out under sub-section
(2) of section 3A;]
(c) the conditions for accepting an Aadhaar number as proof of identity of the Aadhaar number
holder under sub-section (3) of section 4;
3

[(ca) standards of privacy and security to be complied with by the requesting entities under
sub-section (4) of section 4;
(cb) the classification of requesting entities under sub-section (5) of section 4;]
(d) the other categories of individuals under section 5 for whom the Authority shall take special
measures for allotment of Aadhaar number;
(e) the manner of updating biometric information and demographic information under section 6;

1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019, s. 23 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
2. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for clause (a) (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).
3. Ins. by s. 24, ibid, (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

23

(f) the procedure for authentication of the Aadhaar number under section 8;
1

[(fa) the alternate and viable means of identification of individual under the proviso to clause (b)
of sub-section (2) of section 8;
(fb) the manner of obtaining consent under clause (a) of sub-section (2), the manner of providing
information to the individual undergoing offline verification under sub-section (3), and the obligations
of offline verification-seeking entities under clause (c) of sub-section (4) of section 8A;]
(g) the other functions to be performed by the Central Identities Data Repository under section 10;
(h) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure for transaction of business
to be followed by it, including the quorum, under sub-section (1) of section 19;
(i) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the chief
executive officer, officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(j) the demographic information and biometric information under clause (a) and the manner of
their collection under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(k) the manner of maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the Central Identities
Data Repository under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(l) the manner of omitting and deactivating an Aadhaar number and information relating thereto
under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(m) the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of providing or availing of various
subsidies, benefits, services and other purposes for which Aadhaar numbers may be used under clause
(h) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(n) the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars, enrolling agencies and other service
providers and the revocation of appointments thereof under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(o) the manner of sharing information of Aadhaar number holder under clause (k) of sub-section
(2) of section 23;
(p) various processes relating to data management, security protocol and other technology
safeguards under clause (m) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(q) the procedure for issuance of new Aadhaar number to existing Aadhaar number holder under
clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(r) manner of authorising Registrars, enrolling agencies or other service providers to collect such
fees for services provided by them under clause (o) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(s) policies and practices to be followed by the Registrar, enrolling agencies and other service
providers under clause (r) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(t) the manner of accessing the identity information by the Aadhaar number holder under the
proviso to sub-section (5) of section 28;
(u) the manner of sharing the identity information, other than core biometric information, collected
or created under this Act under sub-section (2) of section 29;
(v) the manner of alteration of demographic information under sub-section (1) and biometric
information under sub-section (2) of section 31;
(w) the manner of and the time for maintaining the request for authentication and the response
thereon under sub-section (1), and the manner of obtaining, by the Aadhaar number holder, the
authentication records under sub-section (2) of section 32;

1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2019 (w.e.f. 25-7-2019).

24

(x) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified, or in respect of which provision
is to be or may be made by regulations.
55. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.—Every rule and every regulation made
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or
both the Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation.
56. Application of other laws not barred.—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and
not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.
57. Act not to prevent use of Aadhaar number for other purposes under law.—Omitted by the
Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Act 2019 (Act 14 of 2019), s. 25 (w.e.f. 25-07-2019)
58. Power to remove difficulties.— (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament.
59. Savings.—Anything done or any action taken by the Central Government under the Resolution of
the Government of India, Planning Commission bearing notification number A-43011/02/2009-Admin. I,
dated the 28th January, 2009, or by the Department of Electronics and Information Technology under the
Cabinet Secretariat Notification bearing notification number S.O.2492 (E), dated the 12th September,
2015, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken under this Act.

25

jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—23

REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23

सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-12082023-248045
xxxGIDHxxx
CG-DL-E-12082023-248045
xxxGIDExxx

vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1

izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lañ 25]

ubZ fnYyh] 'kq Ø okj] vxLr 11] 2023@ Jko.k 20] 1945 ¼'kd½

No. 25]

NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 11, 2023/SRAVANA 20, 1945 (SAKA)

bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.

MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 11th August, 2023/Sravana 20, 1945 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
11th August, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:—

THE DIGITAL PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION ACT, 2023
(NO. 22 OF 2023)
[11th August, 2023.]

An Act to provide for the processing of digital personal data in a manner that
recognises both the right of individuals to protect their personal data and the
need to process such personal data for lawful purposes and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.

Short title and
commencement.

2
Definitions.

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate
Tribunal established under section 14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
Act, 1997;
(b) “automated” means any digital process capable of operating automatically
in response to instructions given or otherwise for the purpose of processing data;
(c) “Board” means the Data Protection Board of India established by the Central
Government under section 18;
(d) “certain legitimate uses” means the uses referred to in section 7;
(e) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board;
(f) “child” means an individual who has not completed the age of eighteen
years;
(g) “Consent Manager” means a person registered with the Board, who acts as
a single point of contact to enable a Data Principal to give, manage, review and
withdraw her consent through an accessible, transparent and interoperable platform;
(h) “data” means a representation of information, facts, concepts, opinions or
instructions in a manner suitable for communication, interpretation or processing by
human beings or by automated means;
(i) “Data Fiduciary” means any person who alone or in conjunction with other
persons determines the purpose and means of processing of personal data;
(j) “Data Principal” means the individual to whom the personal data relates and
where such individual is—
(i) a child, includes the parents or lawful guardian of such a child;
(ii) a person with disability, includes her lawful guardian, acting on her
behalf;
(k) “Data Processor” means any person who processes personal data on behalf
of a Data Fiduciary;
(l) “Data Protection Officer” means an individual appointed by the Significant
Data Fiduciary under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 10;
(m) “digital office” means an office that adopts an online mechanism wherein
the proceedings, from receipt of intimation or complaint or reference or directions or
appeal, as the case may be, to the disposal thereof, are conducted in online or digital
mode;
(n) “digital personal data” means personal data in digital form;
(o) “gain” means—
(i) a gain in property or supply of services, whether temporary or
permanent; or
(ii) an opportunity to earn remuneration or greater remuneration or to
gain a financial advantage otherwise than by way of legitimate remuneration;
(p) “loss” means—
(i) a loss in property or interruption in supply of services, whether
temporary or permanent; or
(ii) a loss of opportunity to earn remuneration or greater remuneration or
to gain a financial advantage otherwise than by way of legitimate remuneration;

24 of 1997.

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

3

(q) “Member” means a Member of the Board and includes the Chairperson;
(r) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expressions “notify” and “notified” shall be construed accordingly;
(s) “person” includes—
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) a company;
(iv) a firm;
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not;
(vi) the State; and
(vii) every artificial juristic person, not falling within any of the preceding
sub-clauses;
(t) “personal data” means any data about an individual who is identifiable by or
in relation to such data;
(u) “personal data breach” means any unauthorised processing of personal
data or accidental disclosure, acquisition, sharing, use, alteration, destruction or loss
of access to personal data, that compromises the confidentiality, integrity or availability
of personal data;
(v) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(w) “proceeding” means any action taken by the Board under the provisions of
this Act;
(x) “processing” in relation to personal data, means a wholly or partly automated
operation or set of operations performed on digital personal data, and includes
operations such as collection, recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation,
retrieval, use, alignment or combination, indexing, sharing, disclosure by transmission,
dissemination or otherwise making available, restriction, erasure or destruction;
(y) “she” in relation to an individual includes the reference to such individual
irrespective of gender;
(z) “Significant Data Fiduciary” means any Data Fiduciary or class of Data
Fiduciaries as may be notified by the Central Government under section 10;
(za) “specified purpose” means the purpose mentioned in the notice given by
the Data Fiduciary to the Data Principal in accordance with the provisions of this Act
and the rules made thereunder; and
(zb) “State” means the State as defined under article 12 of the Constitution.
3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall—
(a) apply to the processing of digital personal data within the territory of India
where the personal data is collected––
(i) in digital form; or
(ii) in non-digital form and digitised subsequently;
(b) also apply to processing of digital personal data outside the territory of
India, if such processing is in connection with any activity related to offering of
goods or services to Data Principals within the territory of India;

Application
of Act.

4

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

(c) not apply to—
(i) personal data processed by an individual for any personal or domestic
purpose; and
(ii) personal data that is made or caused to be made publicly available
by—
(A) the Data Principal to whom such personal data relates; or
(B) any other person who is under an obligation under any law for
the time being in force in India to make such personal data publicly
available.
Illustration.
X, an individual, while blogging her views, has publicly made available her personal
data on social media. In such case, the provisions of this Act shall not apply.
CHAPTER II
OBLIGATIONS OF DATA FIDUCIARY
Grounds for
processing
personal data.

4. (1) A person may process the personal data of a Data Principal only in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and for a lawful purpose,—
(a) for which the Data Principal has given her consent; or
(b) for certain legitimate uses.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the expression “lawful purpose” means any
purpose which is not expressly forbidden by law.

Notice.

5. (1) Every request made to a Data Principal under section 6 for consent shall be
accompanied or preceded by a notice given by the Data Fiduciary to the Data Principal,
informing her,—
(i) the personal data and the purpose for which the same is proposed to be
processed;
(ii) the manner in which she may exercise her rights under sub-section (4) of
section 6 and section 13; and
(iii) the manner in which the Data Principal may make a complaint to the Board,
in such manner and as may be prescribed.
Illustration.
X, an individual, opens a bank account using the mobile app or website of Y, a bank.
To complete the Know-Your-Customer requirements under law for opening of bank account,
X opts for processing of her personal data by Y in a live, video-based customer identification
process. Y shall accompany or precede the request for the personal data with notice to X,
describing the personal data and the purpose of its processing.
(2) Where a Data Principal has given her consent for the processing of her personal
data before the date of commencement of this Act,—
(a) the Data Fiduciary shall, as soon as it is reasonably practicable, give to the
Data Principal a notice informing her,––
(i) the personal data and the purpose for which the same has been
processed;
(ii) the manner in which she may exercise her rights under sub-section (4)
of section 6 and section 13; and
(iii) the manner in which the Data Principal may make a complaint to the
Board,
in such manner and as may be prescribed.

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

5

(b) the Data Fiduciary may continue to process the personal data until and
unless the Data Principal withdraws her consent.
Illustration.
X, an individual, gave her consent to the processing of her personal data for an online
shopping app or website operated by Y, an e-commerce service provider, before the
commencement of this Act. Upon commencement of the Act, Y shall, as soon as practicable,
give through email, in-app notification or other effective method information to X, describing
the personal data and the purpose of its processing.
(3) The Data Fiduciary shall give the Data Principal the option to access the contents
of the notice referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) in English or any language specified in
the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
6. (1) The consent given by the Data Principal shall be free, specific, informed,
unconditional and unambiguous with a clear affirmative action, and shall signify an
agreement to the processing of her personal data for the specified purpose and be limited to
such personal data as is necessary for such specified purpose.
Illustration.
X, an individual, downloads Y, a telemedicine app. Y requests the consent of X for (i)
the processing of her personal data for making available telemedicine services, and (ii)
accessing her mobile phone contact list, and X signifies her consent to both. Since phone
contact list is not necessary for making available telemedicine services, her consent shall be
limited to the processing of her personal data for making available telemedicine services.
(2) Any part of consent referred in sub-section (1) which constitutes an infringement
of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any other law for the time being
in force shall be invalid to the extent of such infringement.
Illustration.
X, an individual, buys an insurance policy using the mobile app or website of Y, an
insurer. She gives to Y her consent for (i) the processing of her personal data by Y for the
purpose of issuing the policy, and (ii) waiving her right to file a complaint to the Data
Protection Board of India. Part (ii) of the consent, relating to waiver of her right to file a
complaint, shall be invalid.
(3) Every request for consent under the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder shall be presented to the Data Principal in a clear and plain language, giving her
the option to access such request in English or any language specified in the Eighth
Schedule to the Constitution and providing the contact details of a Data Protection Officer,
where applicable, or of any other person authorised by the Data Fiduciary to respond to
any communication from the Data Principal for the purpose of exercise of her rights under
the provisions of this Act.
(4) Where consent given by the Data Principal is the basis of processing of personal
data, such Data Principal shall have the right to withdraw her consent at any time, with the
ease of doing so being comparable to the ease with which such consent was given.
(5) The consequences of the withdrawal referred to in sub-section (4) shall be borne
by the Data Principal, and such withdrawal shall not affect the legality of processing of the
personal data based on consent before its withdrawal.
Illustration.
X, an individual, is the user of an online shopping app or website operated by Y, an
e-commerce service provider. X consents to the processing of her personal data by Y for the
purpose of fulfilling her supply order and places an order for supply of a good while making
payment for the same. If X withdraws her consent, Y may stop enabling X to use the app or
website for placing orders, but may not stop the processing for supply of the goods already
ordered and paid for by X.
(6) If a Data Principal withdraws her consent to the processing of personal data under
sub-section (5), the Data Fiduciary shall, within a reasonable time, cease and cause its Data
Processors to cease processing the personal data of such Data Principal unless such
processing without her consent is required or authorised under the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder or any other law for the time being in force in India.

Consent.

6

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

Illustration.
X, a telecom service provider, enters into a contract with Y, a Data Processor, for
emailing telephone bills to the customers of X. Z, a customer of X, who had earlier given her
consent to X for the processing of her personal data for emailing of bills, downloads the
mobile app of X and opts to receive bills only on the app. X shall itself cease, and shall
cause Y to cease, the processing of the personal data of Z for emailing bills.
(7) The Data Principal may give, manage, review or withdraw her consent to the Data
Fiduciary through a Consent Manager.
(8) The Consent Manager shall be accountable to the Data Principal and shall act on
her behalf in such manner and subject to such obligations as may be prescribed.
(9) Every Consent Manager shall be registered with the Board in such manner and
subject to such technical, operational, financial and other conditions as may be prescribed.
(10) Where a consent given by the Data Principal is the basis of processing of
personal data and a question arises in this regard in a proceeding, the Data Fiduciary shall
be obliged to prove that a notice was given by her to the Data Principal and consent was
given by such Data Principal to the Data Fiduciary in accordance with the provisions of this
Act and the rules made thereunder.
Certain
legitimate uses.

7. A Data Fiduciary may process personal data of a Data Principal for any of following
uses, namely:—
(a) for the specified purpose for which the Data Principal has voluntarily
provided her personal data to the Data Fiduciary, and in respect of which she has not
indicated to the Data Fiduciary that she does not consent to the use of her personal
data.
Illustrations.
(I) X, an individual, makes a purchase at Y, a pharmacy. She voluntarily provides Y her
personal data and requests Y to acknowledge receipt of the payment made for the purchase
by sending a message to her mobile phone. Y may process the personal data of X for the
purpose of sending the receipt.
(II) X, an individual, electronically messages Y, a real estate broker, requesting Y to
help identify a suitable rented accommodation for her and shares her personal data for this
purpose. Y may process her personal data to identify and intimate to her the details of
accommodation available on rent. Subsequently, X informs Y that X no longer needs help
from Y. Y shall cease to process the personal data of X;
(b) for the State and any of its instrumentalities to provide or issue to the Data
Principal such subsidy, benefit, service, certificate, licence or permit as may be
prescribed, where––
(i) she has previously consented to the processing of her personal data
by the State or any of its instrumentalities for any subsidy, benefit, service,
certificate, licence or permit; or
(ii) such personal data is available in digital form in, or in non-digital form
and digitised subsequently from, any database, register, book or other document
which is maintained by the State or any of its instrumentalities and is notified
by the Central Government,
subject to standards followed for processing being in accordance with the policy
issued by the Central Government or any law for the time being in force for governance
of personal data.
Illustration.
X. a pregnant woman, enrols herself on an app or website to avail of government’s
maternity benefits programme, while consenting to provide her personal data for the purpose
of availing of such benefits. Government may process the personal data of X processing to
determine her eligibility to receive any other prescribed benefit from the government;

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

7

(c) for the performance by the State or any of its instrumentalities of any function
under any law for the time being in force in India or in the interest of sovereignty and
integrity of India or security of the State;
(d) for fulfilling any obligation under any law for the time being in force in India
on any person to disclose any information to the State or any of its instrumentalities,
subject to such processing being in accordance with the provisions regarding
disclosure of such information in any other law for the time being in force;
(e) for compliance with any judgment or decree or order issued under any law
for the time being in force in India, or any judgment or order relating to claims of a
contractual or civil nature under any law for the time being in force outside India;
(f) for responding to a medical emergency involving a threat to the life or
immediate threat to the health of the Data Principal or any other individual;
(g) for taking measures to provide medical treatment or health services to any
individual during an epidemic, outbreak of disease, or any other threat to public
health;
(h) for taking measures to ensure safety of, or provide assistance or services to,
any individual during any disaster, or any breakdown of public order.

53 of 2005.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “disaster” shall
have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (d) of section 2 of the Disaster
Management Act, 2005; or
(i) for the purposes of employment or those related to safeguarding the employer
from loss or liability, such as prevention of corporate espionage, maintenance of
confidentiality of trade secrets, intellectual property, classified information or provision
of any service or benefit sought by a Data Principal who is an employee.
8. (1) A Data Fiduciary shall, irrespective of any agreement to the contrary or failure of
a Data Principal to carry out the duties provided under this Act, be responsible for complying
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder in respect of any processing
undertaken by it or on its behalf by a Data Processor.
(2) A Data Fiduciary may engage, appoint, use or otherwise involve a Data Processor
to process personal data on its behalf for any activity related to offering of goods or
services to Data Principals only under a valid contract.
(3) Where personal data processed by a Data Fiduciary is likely to be—
(a) used to make a decision that affects the Data Principal; or
(b) disclosed to another Data Fiduciary,
the Data Fiduciary processing such personal data shall ensure its completeness,
accuracy and consistency.
(4) A Data Fiduciary shall implement appropriate technical and organisational measures
to ensure effective observance of the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(5) A Data Fiduciary shall protect personal data in its possession or under its control,
including in respect of any processing undertaken by it or on its behalf by a Data Processor,
by taking reasonable security safeguards to prevent personal data breach.
(6) In the event of a personal data breach, the Data Fiduciary shall give the Board and
each affected Data Principal, intimation of such breach in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
(7) A Data Fiduciary shall, unless retention is necessary for compliance with any law
for the time being in force,—
(a) erase personal data, upon the Data Principal withdrawing her consent or as

General
obligations of
Data
Fiduciary.

8

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

soon as it is reasonable to assume that the specified purpose is no longer being
served, whichever is earlier; and
(b) cause its Data Processor to erase any personal data that was made available
by the Data Fiduciary for processing to such Data Processor.
Illustrations.
(I) X, an individual, registers herself on an online marketplace operated by Y, an
e-commerce service provider. X gives her consent to Y for the processing of her personal
data for selling her used car. The online marketplace helps conclude the sale. Y shall no
longer retain her personal data.
(II) X, an individual, decides to close her savings account with Y, a bank. Y is required
by law applicable to banks to maintain the record of the identity of its clients for a period of
ten years beyond closing of accounts. Since retention is necessary for compliance with law,
Y shall retain X’s personal data for the said period.
(8) The purpose referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (7) shall be deemed to no
longer be served, if the Data Principal does not––
(a) approach the Data Fiduciary for the performance of the specified purpose;
and
(b) exercise any of her rights in relation to such processing,
for such time period as may be prescribed, and different time periods may be prescribed for
different classes of Data Fiduciaries and for different purposes.
(9) A Data Fiduciary shall publish, in such manner as may be prescribed, the business
contact information of a Data Protection Officer, if applicable, or a person who is able to
answer on behalf of the Data Fiduciary, the questions, if any, raised by the Data Principal
about the processing of her personal data.
(10) A Data Fiduciary shall establish an effective mechanism to redress the grievances
of Data Principals.
(11) For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that a Data Principal shall be
considered as not having approached the Data Fiduciary for the performance of the specified
purpose, in any period during which she has not initiated contact with the Data Fiduciary
for such performance, in person or by way of communication in electronic or physical form.
Processing of
personal data
of children.

9. (1) The Data Fiduciary shall, before processing any personal data of a child or a
person with disability who has a lawful guardian obtain verifiable consent of the parent of
such child or the lawful guardian, as the case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression “consent of the
parent” includes the consent of lawful guardian, wherever applicable.
(2) A Data Fiduciary shall not undertake such processing of personal data that is
likely to cause any detrimental effect on the well-being of a child.
(3) A Data Fiduciary shall not undertake tracking or behavioural monitoring of children
or targeted advertising directed at children.
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (3) shall not be applicable to processing of
personal data of a child by such classes of Data Fiduciaries or for such purposes, and
subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government may, if satisfied that a Data Fiduciary has ensured that its
processing of personal data of children is done in a manner that is verifiably safe, notify for
such processing by such Data Fiduciary the age above which that Data Fiduciary shall be
exempt from the applicability of all or any of the obligations under sub-sections (1) and (3)
in respect of processing by that Data Fiduciary as the notification may specify.

Additional
obligations of
Significant
Data
Fiduciary.

10. (1) The Central Government may notify any Data Fiduciary or class of Data
Fiduciaries as Significant Data Fiduciary, on the basis of an assessment of such relevant
factors as it may determine, including—

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

9

(a) the volume and sensitivity of personal data processed;
(b) risk to the rights of Data Principal;
(c) potential impact on the sovereignty and integrity of India;
(d) risk to electoral democracy;
(e) security of the State; and
(f) public order.
(2) The Significant Data Fiduciary shall—
(a) appoint a Data Protection Officer who shall—
(i) represent the Significant Data Fiduciary under the provisions of this
Act;
(ii) be based in India;
(iii) be an individual responsible to the Board of Directors or similar
governing body of the Significant Data Fiduciary; and
(iv) be the point of contact for the grievance redressal mechanism under
the provisions of this Act;
(b) appoint an independent data auditor to carry out data audit, who shall
evaluate the compliance of the Significant Data Fiduciary in accordance with the
provisions of this Act; and
(c) undertake the following other measures, namely:—
(i) periodic Data Protection Impact Assessment, which shall be a process
comprising a description of the rights of Data Principals and the purpose of
processing of their personal data, assessment and management of the risk to
the rights of the Data Principals, and such other matters regarding such process
as may be prescribed;
(ii) periodic audit; and
(iii) such other measures, consistent with the provisions of this Act, as
may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF DATA PRINCIPAL
11. (1) The Data Principal shall have the right to obtain from the Data Fiduciary to
whom she has previously given consent, including consent as referred to in clause (a) of
section 7 (hereinafter referred to as the said Data Fiduciary), for processing of personal
data, upon making to it a request in such manner as may be prescribed,—
(a) a summary of personal data which is being processed by such Data Fiduciary
and the processing activities undertaken by that Data Fiduciary with respect to such
personal data;
(b) the identities of all other Data Fiduciaries and Data Processors with whom
the personal data has been shared by such Data Fiduciary, along with a description of
the personal data so shared; and
(c) any other information related to the personal data of such Data Principal and
its processing, as may be prescribed.
(2) Nothing contained in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall apply in
respect of the sharing of any personal data by the said Data Fiduciary with any other Data
Fiduciary authorised by law to obtain such personal data, where such sharing is pursuant

Right to
access
information
about personal
data.

10

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

to a request made in writing by such other Data Fiduciary for the purpose of prevention or
detection or investigation of offences or cyber incidents, or for prosecution or punishment
of offences.
Right to
correction and
erasure of
personal data.

12. (1) A Data Principal shall have the right to correction, completion, updating and
erasure of her personal data for the processing of which she has previously given consent,
including consent as referred to in clause (a) of section 7, in accordance with any requirement
or procedure under any law for the time being in force.
(2) A Data Fiduciary shall, upon receiving a request for correction, completion or
updating from a Data Principal,—
(a) correct the inaccurate or misleading personal data;
(b) complete the incomplete personal data; and
(c) update the personal data.
(3) A Data Principal shall make a request in such manner as may be prescribed to the
Data Fiduciary for erasure of her personal data, and upon receipt of such a request, the Data
Fiduciary shall erase her personal data unless retention of the same is necessary for the
specified purpose or for compliance with any law for the time being in force.

Right of
grievance
redressal.

13. (1) A Data Principal shall have the right to have readily available means of grievance
redressal provided by a Data Fiduciary or Consent Manager in respect of any act or omission
of such Data Fiduciary or Consent Manager regarding the performance of its obligations in
relation to the personal data of such Data Principal or the exercise of her rights under the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(2) The Data Fiduciary or Consent Manager shall respond to any grievances referred
to in sub-section (1) within such period as may be prescribed from the date of its receipt for
all or any class of Data Fiduciaries.
(3) The Data Principal shall exhaust the opportunity of redressing her grievance
under this section before approaching the Board.

Right to
nominate.

14. (1) A Data Principal shall have the right to nominate, in such manner as may be
prescribed, any other individual, who shall, in the event of death or incapacity of the Data
Principal, exercise the rights of the Data Principal in accordance with the provisions of this
Act and the rules made thereunder.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the expression “incapacity” means inability to
exercise the rights of the Data Principal under the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder due to unsoundness of mind or infirmity of body.

Duties of Data
Principal.

15. A Data Principal shall perform the following duties, namely:—
(a) comply with the provisions of all applicable laws for the time being in force
while exercising rights under the provisions of this Act;
(b) to ensure not to impersonate another person while providing her personal
data for a specified purpose;
(c) to ensure not to suppress any material information while providing her
personal data for any document, unique identifier, proof of identity or proof of address
issued by the State or any of its instrumentalities;
(d) to ensure not to register a false or frivolous grievance or complaint with a
Data Fiduciary or the Board; and
(e) to furnish only such information as is verifiably authentic, while exercising
the right to correction or erasure under the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder.

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

11

CHAPTER IV
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, restrict the transfer of personal
data by a Data Fiduciary for processing to such country or territory outside India as may be
so notified.

Processing of
personal data
outside India.

(2) Nothing contained in this section shall restrict the applicability of any law for the
time being in force in India that provides for a higher degree of protection for or restriction
on transfer of personal data by a Data Fiduciary outside India in relation to any personal
data or Data Fiduciary or class thereof.
17. (1) The provisions of Chapter II, except sub-sections (1) and (5) of section 8, and
those of Chapter III and section 16 shall not apply where—
(a) the processing of personal data is necessary for enforcing any legal right or
claim;
(b) the processing of personal data by any court or tribunal or any other body
in India which is entrusted by law with the performance of any judicial or quasi-judicial
or regulatory or supervisory function, where such processing is necessary for the
performance of such function;
(c) personal data is processed in the interest of prevention, detection,
investigation or prosecution of any offence or contravention of any law for the time
being in force in India;
(d) personal data of Data Principals not within the territory of India is processed
pursuant to any contract entered into with any person outside the territory of India
by any person based in India;
(e) the processing is necessary for a scheme of compromise or arrangement or
merger or amalgamation of two or more companies or a reconstruction by way of
demerger or otherwise of a company, or transfer of undertaking of one or more company
to another company, or involving division of one or more companies, approved by a
court or tribunal or other authority competent to do so by any law for the time being
in force; and
(f) the processing is for the purpose of ascertaining the financial information
and assets and liabilities of any person who has defaulted in payment due on account
of a loan or advance taken from a financial institution, subject to such processing
being in accordance with the provisions regarding disclosure of information or data
in any other law for the time being in force.

31 of 2016.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expressions “default” and
“financial institution” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in
sub-sections (12) and (14) of section 3 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
Illustration.
X, an individual, takes a loan from Y, a bank. X defaults in paying her monthly loan
repayment instalment on the date on which it falls due. Y may process the personal data of
X for ascertaining her financial information and assets and liabilities.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall not apply in respect of the processing of personal
data—
(a) by such instrumentality of the State as the Central Government may notify,
in the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the State, friendly
relations with foreign States, maintenance of public order or preventing incitement to
any cognizable offence relating to any of these, and the processing by the Central
Government of any personal data that such instrumentality may furnish to it; and

Exemptions.

12

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

(b) necessary for research, archiving or statistical purposes if the personal data
is not to be used to take any decision specific to a Data Principal and such processing
is carried on in accordance with such standards as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may, having regard to the volume and nature of personal
data processed, notify certain Data Fiduciaries or class of Data Fiduciaries, including startups,
as Data Fiduciaries to whom the provisions of section 5, sub-sections (3) and (7) of
section 8 and sections 10 and 11 shall not apply.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the term “startup” means a
private limited company or a partnership firm or a limited liability partnership incorporated
in India, which is eligible to be and is recognised as such in accordance with the criteria and
process notified by the department to which matters relating to startups are allocated in the
Central Government.
(4) In respect of processing by the State or any instrumentality of the State, the
provisions of sub-section (7) of section 8 and sub-section (3) of section 12 and, where such
processing is for a purpose that does not include making of a decision that affects the Data
Principal, sub-section (2) of section 12 shall not apply.
(5) The Central Government may, before expiry of five years from the date of
commencement of this Act, by notification, declare that any provision of this Act shall not
apply to such Data Fiduciary or classes of Data Fiduciaries for such period as may be
specified in the notification.
CHAPTER V
DATA PROTECTION BOARD OF INDIA
Establishment
of Board.

18. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the
Data Protection Board of India.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Board shall be at such place as the Central Government
may notify.

Composition
and
qualifications
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and Members.

19. (1) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of other Members
as the Central Government may notify.

Salary,
allowances
payable to and
term of
office.

20. (1) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed, and shall not be varied
to their disadvantage after their appointment.

(2) The Chairperson and other Members shall be appointed by the Central Government
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson and other Members shall be a person of ability, integrity and
standing who possesses special knowledge or practical experience in the fields of data
governance, administration or implementation of laws related to social or consumer
protection, dispute resolution, information and communication technology, digital economy,
law, regulation or techno-regulation, or in any other field which in the opinion of the Central
Government may be useful to the Board, and at least one among them shall be an expert in
the field of law.

(2) The Chairperson and other Members shall hold office for a term of two years and
shall be eligible for re-appointment.

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

13

21. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed and continued as the
Chairperson or a Member, if she—
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent;
(b) has been convicted of an offence, which in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude;
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member;

Disqualifications
for
appointment
and
continuation
as
Chairperson
and Members
of Board.

(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially
her functions as a Member; or
(e) has so abused her position as to render her continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest.
(2) The Chairperson or Member shall not be removed from her office by the Central
Government unless she has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
22. (1) The Chairperson or any other Member may give notice in writing to the Central
Government of resigning from her office, and such resignation shall be effective from the
date on which the Central Government permits her to relinquish office, or upon expiry of a
period of three months from the date of receipt of such notice, or upon a duly appointed
successor entering upon her office, or upon the expiry of the term of her office, whichever
is earliest.

Resignation
by Members
and filling of
vacancy.

(2) A vacancy caused by the resignation or removal or death of the Chairperson or
any other Member, or otherwise, shall be filled by fresh appointment in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
(3) The Chairperson and any other Member shall not, for a period of one year from the
date on which they cease to hold such office, except with the previous approval of the
Central Government, accept any employment, and shall also disclose to the Central
Government any subsequent acceptance of employment with any Data Fiduciary against
whom proceedings were initiated by or before such Chairperson or other Member.
23. (1) The Board shall observe such procedure in regard to the holding of and
transaction of business at its meetings, including by digital means, and authenticate its
orders, directions and instruments in such manner as may be prescribed.

Proceedings
of Board.

(2) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of the Board;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chairperson or other
Member of the Board; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board, which does not affect the
merits of the case.
(3) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge her functions owing to absence,
illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member shall discharge the functions of the
Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes her duties.

45 of 1860.

24. The Board may, with previous approval of the Central Government, appoint such
officers and employees as it may deem necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions
under the provisions of this Act, on such terms and conditions of appointment and service
as may be prescribed.

Officers and
employees of
Board.

25. The Chairperson, Members, officers and employees of the Board shall be deemed,
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of provisions of this Act, to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

Members and
officers to be
public
servants.

14
Powers of
Chairperson.

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

26. The Chairperson shall exercise the following powers, namely:—
(a) general superintendence and giving direction in respect of all administrative
matters of the Board;
(b) authorise any officer of the Board to scrutinise any intimation, complaint,
reference or correspondence addressed to the Board; and
(c) authorise performance of any of the functions of the Board and conduct any
of its proceedings, by an individual Member or groups of Members and to allocate
proceedings among them.
CHAPTER VI
POWERS, FUNCTIONS AND PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED BY BOARD

Powers and
functions of
Board.

27. (1) The Board shall exercise and perform the following powers and functions,
namely:—
(a) on receipt of an intimation of personal data breach under sub-section (6) of
section 8, to direct any urgent remedial or mitigation measures in the event of a
personal data breach, and to inquire into such personal data breach and impose
penalty as provided in this Act;
(b) on a complaint made by a Data Principal in respect of a personal data breach
or a breach in observance by a Data Fiduciary of its obligations in relation to her
personal data or the exercise of her rights under the provisions of this Act, or on a
reference made to it by the Central Government or a State Government, or in compliance
of the directions of any court, to inquire into such breach and impose penalty as
provided in this Act;
(c) on a complaint made by a Data Principal in respect of a breach in observance
by a Consent Manager of its obligations in relation to her personal data, to inquire
into such breach and impose penalty as provided in this Act;
(d) on receipt of an intimation of breach of any condition of registration of a
Consent Manager, to inquire into such breach and impose penalty as provided in this
Act; and
(e) on a reference made by the Central Government in respect of the breach in
observance of the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 37 by an intermediary, to
inquire into such breach and impose penalty as provided in this Act.
(2) The Board may, for the effective discharge of its functions under the provisions of
this Act, after giving the person concerned an opportunity of being heard and after recording
reasons in writing, issue such directions as it may consider necessary to such person, who
shall be bound to comply with the same.
(3) The Board may, on a representation made to it by a person affected by a direction
issued under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), or on a reference made by the Central
Government, modify, suspend, withdraw or cancel such direction and, while doing so,
impose such conditions as it may deem fit, subject to which the modification, suspension,
withdrawal or cancellation shall have effect.

Procedure to
be followed by
Board.

28. (1) The Board shall function as an independent body and shall, as far as practicable,
function as a digital office, with the receipt of complaints and the allocation, hearing and
pronouncement of decisions in respect of the same being digital by design, and adopt such
techno-legal measures as may be prescribed.
(2) The Board may, on receipt of an intimation or complaint or reference or directions
as referred to in sub-section (1) of section 27, take action in accordance with the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder.

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

15

(3) The Board shall determine whether there are sufficient grounds to proceed with an
inquiry.
(4) In case the Board determines that there are insufficient grounds, it may, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, close the proceedings.
(5) In case the Board determines that there are sufficient grounds to proceed with
inquiry, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, inquire into the affairs of any person for
ascertaining whether such person is complying with or has complied with the provisions of
this Act.
(6) The Board shall conduct such inquiry following the principles of natural justice
and shall record reasons for its actions during the course of such inquiry.
5 of 1908.

(7) For the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the Board shall have
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in
respect of matters relating to—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining her
on oath;
(b) receiving evidence of affidavit requiring the discovery and production of
documents;
(c) inspecting any data, book, document, register, books of account or any
other document; and
(d) such other matters as may be prescribed.
(8) The Board or its officers shall not prevent access to any premises or take into
custody any equipment or any item that may adversely affect the day-to-day functioning of
a person.
(9) The Board may require the services of any police officer or any officer of the
Central Government or a State Government to assist it for the purposes of this section and
it shall be the duty of every such officer to comply with such requisition.
(10) During the course of the inquiry, if the Board considers it necessary, it may for
reasons to be recorded in writing, issue interim orders after giving the person concerned an
opportunity of being heard.
(11) On completion of the inquiry and after giving the person concerned an opportunity
of being heard, the Board may for reasons to be recorded in writing, either close the
proceedings or proceed in accordance with section 33.
(12) At any stage after receipt of a complaint, if the Board is of the opinion that the
complaint is false or frivolous, it may issue a warning or impose costs on the complainant.
CHAPTER VII
APPEAL AND ALTERNATE DISPUTE RESOLUTION
29. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order or direction made by the Board under this
Act may prefer an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of sixty days from
the date of receipt of the order or direction appealed against and it shall be in such form and
manner and shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the period
specified in sub-section (2), if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not preferring
the appeal within that period.
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after
giving the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as
it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.

Appeal to
Appellate
Tribunal.

16

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the Board
and to the parties to the appeal.
(6) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) shall be dealt
with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the
appeal finally within six months from the date on which the appeal is presented to it.
(7) Where any appeal under sub-section (6) could not be disposed of within the
period of six months, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not
disposing of the appeal within that period.
(8) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 14A and section 16 of the Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, the Appellate Tribunal shall deal with an appeal
under this section in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.

24 of 1997.

(9) Where an appeal is filed against the orders of the Appellate Tribunal under this
Act, the provisions of section 18 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997
shall apply.

24 of 1997.

(10) In respect of appeals filed under the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal
shall, as far as practicable, function as a digital office, with the receipt of appeal, hearing and
pronouncement of decisions in respect of the same being digital by design.
Orders passed
by Appellate
Tribunal to be
executable as
decree.

30. (1) An order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable
by it as a decree of civil court, and for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the
powers of a civil court.

Alternate
dispute
resolution.

31. If the Board is of the opinion that any complaint may be resolved by mediation, it
may direct the parties concerned to attempt resolution of the dispute through such mediation
by such mediator as the parties may mutually agree upon, or as provided for under any law
for the time being in force in India.

Voluntary
undertaking.

32. (1) The Board may accept a voluntary undertaking in respect of any matter related
to observance of the provisions of this Act from any person at any stage of a proceeding
under section 28.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal
may transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil
court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court.

(2) The voluntary undertaking referred to in sub-section (1) may include an
undertaking to take such action within such time as may be determined by the Board, or
refrain from taking such action, and or publicising such undertaking.
(3) The Board may, after accepting the voluntary undertaking and with the consent of
the person who gave the voluntary undertaking vary the terms included in the voluntary
undertaking.
(4) The acceptance of the voluntary undertaking by the Board shall constitute a bar
on proceedings under the provisions of this Act as regards the contents of the voluntary
undertaking, except in cases covered by sub-section (5).
(5) Where a person fails to adhere to any term of the voluntary undertaking accepted
by the Board, such breach shall be deemed to be breach of the provisions of this Act and
the Board may, after giving such person an opportunity of being heard, proceed in accordance
with the provisions of section 33.
CHAPTER VIII
PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION
Penalties.

33. (1) If the Board determines on conclusion of an inquiry that breach of the provisions
of this Act or the rules made thereunder by a person is significant, it may, after giving the

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

17

person an opportunity of being heard, impose such monetary penalty specified in the
Schedule.
(2) While determining the amount of monetary penalty to be imposed under
sub-section (1), the Board shall have regard to the following matters, namely:—
(a) the nature, gravity and duration of the breach;
(b) the type and nature of the personal data affected by the breach;
(c) repetitive nature of the breach;
(d) whether the person, as a result of the breach, has realised a gain or avoided
any loss;
(e) whether the person took any action to mitigate the effects and consequences
of the breach, and the timeliness and effectiveness of such action;
(f) whether the monetary penalty to be imposed is proportionate and effective,
having regard to the need to secure observance of and deter breach of the provisions
of this Act; and
(g) the likely impact of the imposition of the monetary penalty on the person.
34. All sums realised by way of penalties imposed by the Board under this Act, shall
be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.

Crediting sums
realised by
way of
penalties to
Consolidated
Fund of India.

CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
35. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central
Government, the Board, its Chairperson and any Member, officer or employee thereof for
anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith under the provisions of this
Act or the rules made thereunder.

Protection of
action taken
in good faith.

36. The Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, require the Board and
any Data Fiduciary or intermediary to furnish such information as it may call for.

Power to call
for
information.

37. (1) The Central Government or any of its officers specially authorised by it in this
behalf may, upon receipt of a reference in writing from the Board that—

Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.

(a) intimates the imposition of monetary penalty by the Board on a Data Fiduciary
in two or more instances; and
(b) advises, in the interests of the general public, the blocking for access by the
public to any information generated, transmitted, received, stored or hosted, in any
computer resource that enables such Data Fiduciary to carry on any activity relating
to offering of goods or services to Data Principals within the territory of India,
after giving an opportunity of being heard to that Data Fiduciary, on being satisfied that it
is necessary or expedient so to do, in the interests of the general public, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, by order, direct any agency of the Central Government or any intermediary
to block for access by the public or cause to be blocked for access by the public any such
information.
(2) Every intermediary who receives a direction issued under sub-section (1) shall be
bound to comply with the same.

21 of 2000.

(3) For the purposes of this section, the expressions “computer resource”,
“information” and “intermediary” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in
the Information Technology Act, 2000.

18
Consistency
with other
laws.

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

38. (1) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
(2) In the event of any conflict between a provision of this Act and a provision of any
other law for the time being in force, the provision of this Act shall prevail to the extent of
such conflict.

Bar of
jurisdiction.

39. No civil court shall have the jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of any matter for which the Board is empowered under the provisions of this Act
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power under the provisions of this Act.

Power to
make rules.

40. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition of
previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, to carry
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner in which the notice given by the Data Fiduciary to a Data Principal
shall inform her, under sub-section (1) of section 5;
(b) the manner in which the notice given by the Data Fiduciary to a Data Principal
shall inform her, under sub-section (2) of section 5;
(c) the manner of accountability and the obligations of Consent Manager under
sub-section (8) of section 6;
(d) the manner of registration of Consent Manager and the conditions relating
thereto, under sub-section (9) of section 6;
(e) the subsidy, benefit, service, certificate, licence or permit for the provision or
issuance of which, personal data may be processed under clause (b) of section 7;
(f) the form and manner of intimation of personal data breach to the Board under
sub-section (6) of section 8;
(g) the time period for the specified purpose to be deemed as no longer being
served, under sub-section (8) of section 8;
(h) the manner of publishing the business contact information of a Data
Protection Officer under sub-section (9) of section 8;
(i) the manner of obtaining verifiable consent under sub-section (1) of
section 9;
(j) the classes of Data Fiduciaries, the purposes of processing of personal data
of a child and the conditions relating thereto, under sub-section (4) of section 9;
(k) the other matters comprising the process of Data Protection Impact
Assessment under sub-clause (i) of clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 10;
(l) the other measures that the Significant Data Fiduciary shall undertake under
sub-clause (iii) of clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 10;
(m) the manner in which a Data Principal shall make a request to the Data
Fiduciary to obtain information and any other information related to the personal data
of such Data Principal and its processing, under sub-section (1) of section 11;
(n) the manner in which a Data Principal shall make a request to the Data
Fiduciary for erasure of her personal data under sub-section (3) of section 12;
(o) the period within which the Data Fiduciary shall respond to any grievances
under sub-section (2) of section 13;

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

19

(p) the manner of nomination of any other individual by the Data Principal
under sub-section (1) of section 14;
(q) the standards for processing the personal data for exemption under clause (b)
of sub-section (2) of section 17;
(r) the manner of appointment of the Chairperson and other Members of the
Board under sub-section (2) of section 19;
(s) the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of services of the
Chairperson and other Members of the Board under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(t) the manner of authentication of orders, directions and instruments under
sub-section (1) of section 23;
(u) the terms and conditions of appointment and service of officers and
employees of the Board under section 24;
(v) the techno-legal measures to be adopted by the Board under sub-section (1)
of section 28;
(w) the other matters under clause (d) of sub-section (7) of section 28;
(x) the form, manner and fee for filing an appeal under sub-section (2) of
section 29;
(y) the procedure for dealing an appeal under sub-section (8) of section 29;
(z) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.
41. Every rule made and every notification issued under section 16 and section 42 of
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification
should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or notification.

Laying of
rules and
certain
notifications.

42. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, amend the Schedule, subject to
the restriction that no such notification shall have the effect of increasing any penalty
specified therein to more than twice of what was specified in it when this Act was originally
enacted.

Power to
amend
Schedule.

(2) Any amendment notified under sub-section (1) shall have effect as if enacted in
this Act and shall come into force on the date of the notification.
43. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty.

Power to
remove
difficulties.

(2) No order as referred to in sub-section (1) shall be made after the expiry of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
24 of 1997.

44. (1) In section 14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, in
clause (c), for sub-clauses (i) and (ii), the following sub-clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—

Amendments
to certain
Acts.

20

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II—

“(i) the Appellate Tribunal under the Information Technology Act, 2000;

21 of 2000.

(ii) the Appellate Tribunal under the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority
of India Act, 2008; and

27 of 2008.

(iii) the Appellate Tribunal under the Digital Personal Data Protection
Act, 2023.”.
(2) The Information Technology Act, 2000 shall be amended in the following manner,
namely:—

21 of 2000.

(a) section 43A shall be omitted;
(b) in section 81, in the proviso, after the words and figures “the Patents
Act, 1970”, the words and figures “or the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023”
shall be inserted; and

39 of 1970.

(c) in section 87, in sub-section (2), clause (ob) shall be omitted.
(3) In section 8 of the Right to Information Act, 2005, in sub-section (1), for clause (j),
the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(j) information which relates to personal information;”.

22 of 2005.

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

21

THE SCHEDULE
[See section 33 (1)]
Sl. No.

Breach of provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder

Penalty

(1)

(2)

(3)

1.

Breach in observing the obligation of Data Fiduciary to
take reasonable security safeguards to prevent personal
data breach under sub-section (5) of section 8.

May extend to two
hundred and fifty
crore rupees.

2.

Breach in observing the obligation to give the Board or
affected Data Principal notice of a personal data breach
under sub-section (6) of section 8.

May extend to two
hundred crore
rupees.

3.

Breach in observance of additional obligations in relation
to children under section 9.

May extend to two
hundred crore
rupees.

4.

Breach in observance of additional obligations of
Significant Data Fiduciary under section 10.

May extend to one
hundred and fifty
crore rupees.

5.

Breach in observance of the duties under section 15.

May extend to ten
thousand rupees.

6.

Breach of any term of voluntary undertaking accepted by
the Board under section 32.

Up to the extent
applicable for the
breach in respect
of which the
proceedings under
section 28 were
instituted.

7.

Breach of any other provision of this Act or the rules
made thereunder.

May extend to fifty
crore rupees.

————

DR. REETA VASISHTA,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.

UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
MGIPMRND—288GI—11-08-2023.

THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
–––––––––
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
–––––––––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
DIGITAL SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE
3. Authentication of electronic records.
3A. Electronic signature.
CHAPTER III
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE
4. Legal recognition of electronic records.
5. Legal recognition of electronic signatures.
6. Use of electronic records and electronic signatures in Government and its agencies.
6A. Delivery of services by service provider.
7. Retention of electronic records.
7A. Audit of documents, etc., maintained in electronic form.
8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette.
9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right to insist document should be accepted in electronic form.
10. Power to make rules by Central Government in respect of electronic signature.
10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means.
CHAPTER IV
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS
11. Attribution of electronic records.
12. Acknowledgment of receipt.
13. Time and place of despatch and receipt of electronic record.
CHAPTER V
SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND SECURE ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE
14. Secure electronic record.
15. Secure electronic signature.
16. Security procedures and practices.
CHAPTER VI
REGULATION OF CERTIFYING AUTHORITIES
17. Appointment of Controller and other officers.
18. Functions of Controller.
19. Recognition of foreign Certifying Authorities.
20. [Omitted.].
21. Licence to issue electronic signature Certificates.
22. Application for licence.
23. Renewal of licence.
24. Procedure for grant or rejection of licence.
25. Suspension of licence.
26. Notice of suspension or revocation of licence.
1

SECTIONS
27. Power to delegate.
28. Power to investigate contraventions.
29. Access to computers and data.
30. Certifying Authority to follow certain procedures.
31. Certifying Authority to ensure compliance of the Act, etc.
32. Display of licence.
33. Surrender of licence.
34. Disclosure.
CHAPTER VII
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE CERTIFICATES
35. Certifying authority to issue electronic signature Certificate.
36. Representations upon issuance of Digital signature Certificate.
37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate.
38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate.
39. Notice of suspension or revocation.
CHAPTER VIII
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS
40. Generating key pair.
40A. Duties of subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate.
41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate.
42. Control of private key.
CHAPTER IX
PENALTIES, COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION
43. Penalty and compensation for damage to computer, computer system, etc.
43A. Compensation for failure to protect data.
44. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc.
45. Residuary penalty.
46. Power to adjudicate.
47. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer.
CHAPTER X
THE APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
48. Appellate Tribunal.
49. [Omitted.].
50. [Omitted.].
51. [Omitted.].
52. [Omitted.].
52A. [Omitted.].
52B. [Omitted.].
52C. [Omitted.].
52D. Decision by majority.
53. [Omitted.].
54. [Omitted.].
55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings.
56. [Omitted.].
57. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.
58. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal.
59. Right to legal representation.
60. Limitation.
61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.
62. Appeal to High Court.
63. Compounding of contraventions.
2

SECTIONS
64. Recovery of penalty or compensation.
CHAPTER XI
OFFENCES
65. Tampering with computer source documents.
66. Computer related offences.
66A. Punishment for sending offensive messages through communication service, etc.
66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication device.
66C. Punishment for identity theft.
66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource.
66E. Punishment for violation of privacy.
66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism.
67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form.
67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act, etc., in
electronic form.
67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually explicit act,
etc., in electronic form.
67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries.
68. Power of Controller to give directions.
69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information through
any computer resource.
69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through any
computer resource.
69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information through any computer
resource for cyber security.
70. Protected system.
70A. National nodal agency.
70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as national agency for incident response.
71. Penalty for misrepresentation.
72. Penalty for Breach of confidentiality and privacy.
72A. Punishment for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract.
73. Penalty for publishing electronic signature Certificate false in certain particulars.
74. Publication for fraudulent purpose.
75. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India.
76. Confiscation.
77. Compensation, penalties or confiscation not to interfere with other punishment.
77A. Compounding of offences.
77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable.
78. Power to investigate offences.
CHAPTER XII
INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES
79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases.
CHAPTER XIIA
EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE
79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence.
CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc.
81. Act to have overriding effect.
81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated cheque.
82. Controller, Deputy Controller and Assistant Controller to be public servants.
3

SECTIONS
83. Power to give directions.
84. Protection of action taken in good faith.
84A. Modes or methods for encryption.
84B. Punishment for abetment of offences.
84C. Punishment for attempt to commit offences.
85. Offences by companies.
86. Removal of difficulties.
87. Power of Central Government to make rules.
88. Constitution of Advisory Committee.
89. Power of Controller to make regulations.
90. Power of State Government to make rules.
91. [Omitted.].
92. [Omitted.].
93. [Omitted.].
94. [Omitted.].
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE [Omitted.].
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE [Omitted.].

4

THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
ACT NO. 21 OF 2000
[9th June, 2000.]

An Act to provide legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data
interchange and other means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as
―electronic commerce‖, which involve the use of alternatives to paper-based methods of
communication and storage of information, to facilitate electronic filing of documents with
the Government agencies and further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, the Banker’s Books Evidence Act, 1891 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the General Assembly of the United Nations by resolution A/RES/51/162, dated the 30th
January, 1997 has adopted the Model Law on Electronic Commerce adopted by the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law;
AND WHEREAS the said resolution recommends inter alia, that all States give favourable
consideration to the said Model Law when they enact or revise their laws, in view of the need for
uniformity of the law applicable to alternatives to paper-based methods of communication and storage of
information;
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said resolution and to promote efficient
delivery of Government services by means of reliable electronic records.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.—(1) This Act may be called the
Information Technology Act, 2000.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to
any offence or contravention thereunder committed outside India by any person.
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of that
provision.
2

[(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to documents or transactions specified in the First Schedule:

Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First
Schedule by way of addition or deletion of entries thereto.
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]
2. Definitions.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ―access‖ with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means gaining entry into,
instructing or communicating with the logical, arithmetical, or memory function resources of a
computer, computer system or computer network;
(b) ―addressee‖ means a person who is intended by the originator to receive the electronic record
but does not include any intermediary;
(c) ―adjudicating officer‖ means an adjudicating officer appointed under sub-section (1) of
section 46;

1. 17th October, 2000, vide notification No. G.S.R. 788 (E), dated 17th October, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part II, sec. 3(ii).
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 3, for sub-section (4) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

5

(d) ―affixing 1[electronic signature]‖ with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions
means adoption of any methodology or procedure by a person for the purpose of authenticating an
electronic record by means of digital signature;
[(da) ―Appellate Tribunal‖ means the Appellate Tribunal referred to in sub-section (1) of section
48;]
2

(e) ―appropriate Government‖ means as respects any matter,–
(i) enumerated in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution;
(ii) relating to any State law enacted under List III of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution,
the State Government and in any other case, the Central Government;
(f) ―asymmetric crypto system‖ means a system of a secure key pair consisting of a private key
for creating a digital signature and a public key to verify the digital signature;
(g) ―Certifying Authority‖ means a person who has been granted a licence to issue a 1[electronic
signature] Certificate under section 24;
(h) ―certification practice statement‖ means a statement issued by a Certifying Authority to
specify the practices that the Certifying Authority employs in issuing 1[electronic signature]
Certificates;
[(ha) ―communication device‖ means cell phones, personal digital assistance or combination of
both or any other device used to communicate, send or transmit any text, video, audio or image;]
3

(i) ―computer‖ means any electronic, magnetic, optical or other high-speed data processing device
or system which performs logical, arithmetic, and memory functions by manipulations of electronic,
magnetic or optical impulses, and includes all input, output, processing, storage, computer software or
communication facilities which are connected or related to the computer in a computer system or
computer network;
[(j) ―computer network‖ means the inter-connection of one or more computers or computer
systems or communication device through–
4

(i) the use of satellite, microwave, terrestrial line, wire, wireless or other communication
media; and
(ii) terminals or a complex consisting of two or more interconnected computers or
communication device whether or not the inter-connection is continuously maintained;]
(k) ―computer resource‖ means computer, computer system, computer network, data, computer
data base or software;
(l) ―computer system‖ means a device or collection of devices, including input and output support
devices and excluding calculators which are not programmable and capable of being used in
conjunction with external files, which contain computer programmes, electronic instructions, input
data and output data, that performs logic, arithmetic, data storage and retrieval, communication
control and other functions;
(m) ―Controller‖ means the Controller of Certifying Authorities appointed under sub-section (1)
of section 17;
5

*

*

*

*

*

[(na) ―cyber cafe‖ means any facility from where access to the internet is offered by any person
in the ordinary course of business to the members of the public;
2

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for ―digital signature‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause (j) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
5. Clause (n) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s.169 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

6

(nb) ―cyber security‖ means protecting information, equipment, devices, computer, computer
resource, communication device and information stored therein from unauthorised access, use,
disclosure, disruption, modification or destruction;]
(o) ―data‖ means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions
which are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised manner, and is intended to be
processed, is being processed or has been processed in a computer system or computer network, and
may be in any form (including computer printouts magnetic or optical storage media, punched cards,
punched tapes) or stored internally in the memory of the computer;
(p) ―digital signature‖ means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by means of
an electronic method or procedure in accordance with the provisions of section 3;
(q) ―Digital Signature Certificate‖ means a Digital Signature Certificate issued under sub-section
(4) of section 35;
(r) ―electronic form‖ with reference to information, means any information generated, sent,
received or stored in media, magnetic, optical, computer memory, micro film, computer generated
micro fiche or similar device;
(s) ―Electronic Gazette‖ means the Official Gazette published in the electronic form;
(t) ―electronic record‖ means data, record or data generated, image or sound stored, received or
sent in an electronic form or micro film or computer generated micro fiche;
[(ta) ―electronic signature‖ means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by
means of the electronic technique specified in the Second Schedule and includes digital signature;
1

(tb) ―Electronic Signature Certificate‖ means an Electronic Signature Certificate issued under
section 35 and includes Digital Signature Certificate;]
(u) ―function‖, in relation to a computer, includes logic, control, arithmetical process, deletion,
storage and retrieval and communication or telecommunication from or within a computer;
1

[(ua) Indian Computer Emergency Response Team‖ means an agency established under subsection (1) of Section 70B;]
(v) ―information‖ includes 2[data, message, text,] images, sound, voice, codes, computer
programmes, software and data bases or micro film or computer generated micro fiche;
[(w) ―intermediary‖, with respect to any particular electronic records, means any person who on
behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service with respect
to that record and includes telecom service providers, network service providers, internet service
providers, web-hosting service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online-auction sites,
online-market places and cyber cafes;]
3

(x) ―key pair‖, in an asymmetric crypto system, means a private key and its mathematically
related public key, which are so related that the public key can verify a digital signature created by the
private key;
(y) ―law‖ includes any Act of Parliament or of a State Legislature, Ordinances promulgated by the
President or a Governor, as the case may be, Regulations made by the President under article 240,
Bills enacted as President's Act under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of article 357 of the Constitution
and includes rules, regulations, bye-laws and orders issued or made thereunder;
(z) ―licence‖ means a licence granted to a Certifying Authority under section 24;
(za) ―originator‖ means a person who sends, generates, stores or transmits any electronic message
or causes any electronic message to be sent, generated, stored or transmitted to any other person but
does not include an intermediary;
(zb) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(zc) ―private key‖ means the key of a key pair used to create a digital signature;
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for ―data, text‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause (w) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

7

(zd) ―public key‖ means the key of a key pair used to verify a digital signature and listed in the
Digital Signature Certificate;
(ze) ―secure system‖ means computer hardware, software, and procedure that–
(a) are reasonably secure from unauthorised access and misuse;
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation;
(c) are reasonably suited to performing the intended functions; and
(d) adhere to generally accepted security procedures;
(zf) ―security procedure‖ means the security procedure prescribed under section 16 by the Central
Government;
(zg) ―subscriber‖ means a person in whose name the 1[electronic signature] Certificate is issued;
(zh) ―verify‖, in relation to a digital signature, electronic record or public key, with its
grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means to determine whether–
(a) the initial electronic record was affixed with the digital signature by the use of private key
corresponding to the public key of the subscriber;
(b) the initial electronic record is retained intact or has been altered since such electronic
record was so affixed with the digital signature.
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall, in relation to an area in
which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding
law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.
CHAPTER II
2

[DIGITAL SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE]

3. Authentication of electronic records.–(1) Subject to the provisions of this section any subscriber
may authenticate an electronic record by affixing his digital signature.
(2) The authentication of the electronic record shall be effected by the use of asymmetric crypto
system and hash function which envelop and transform the initial electronic record into another electronic
record.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this sub-section, ―hash function‖ means an algorithm mapping or
translation of one sequence of bits into another, generally smaller, set known as ―hash result‖ such that an
electronic record yields the same hash result every time the algorithm is executed with the same electronic
record as its input making it computationally infeasible–
(a) to derive or reconstruct the original electronic record from the hash result produced by the
algorithm;
(b) that two electronic records can produce the same hash result using the algorithm.
(3) Any person by the use of a public key of the subscriber can verify the electronic record.
(4) The private key and the public key are unique to the subscriber and constitute a functioning key
pair.
3

[3A. Electronic signature.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, but subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), a subscriber may authenticate any electronic record by such electronic
signature or electronic authentication technique which—
(a) is considered reliable; and
(b) may be specified in the Second Schedule.
(2) For the purposes of this section any electronic signature or electronic authentication technique
shall be considered reliable if—
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for ―digital signature‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for the heading ―DIGITAL SIGNATURE‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

8

(a) the signature creation data or the authentication data are, within the context in which they are
used, linked to the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and to no other person;
(b) the signature creation data or the authentication data were, at the time of signing, under the
control of the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and of no other person;
(c) any alteration to the electronic signature made after affixing such signature is detectable;
(d) any alteration to the information made after its authentication by electronic signature is
detectable; and
(e) it fulfils such other conditions which may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure for the purpose of ascertaining whether
electronic signature is that of the person by whom it is purported to have been affixed or authenticated.
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or omit any
electronic signature or electronic authentication technique and the procedure for affixing such signature
from the Second Schedule:
Provided that no electronic signature or authentication technique shall be specified in the Second
Schedule unless such signature or technique is reliable.
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]
CHAPTER III
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE
4. Legal recognition of electronic records.—Where any law provides that information or any other
matter shall be in writing or in the typewritten or printed form, then, notwithstanding anything contained
in such law, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such information or matter is–
(a) rendered or made available in an electronic form; and
(b) accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent reference.
5. Legal recognition of 1[electronic signatures].—Where any law provides that information or any
other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the signature or any document shall be signed or bear the
signature of any person, then, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement shall be
deemed to have been satisfied, if such information or matter is authenticated by means of 1[electronic
signature] affixed in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, ―signed‖, with its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions, shall, with reference to a person, mean affixing of his hand written signature or any mark on
any document and the expression ―signature‖ shall be construed accordingly.
6. Use of electronic records and 1[electronic signatures] in Government and its agencies.–(1)
Where any law provides for—
(a) the filing of any form, application or any other document with any office, authority, body or
agency owned or controlled by the appropriate Government in a particular manner;
(b) the issue or grant of any licence, permit, sanction or approval by whatever name called in a
particular manner;
(c) the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner,
then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, such requirement
shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment, as the case may be,
is effected by means of such electronic form as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(2) The appropriate Government may, for the purposes of sub-section (1), by rules, prescribe—
(a) the manner and format in which such electronic records shall be filed, created or issued;

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for ―digital signatures‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

9

(b) the manner or method of payment of any fee or charges for filing, creation or issue any
electronic record under clause (a).
1

[6A. Delivery of services by service provider.—(1) The appropriate Government may, for the
purposes of this Chapter and for efficient delivery of services to the public through electronic means
authorise, by order, any service provider to set up, maintain and upgrade the computerised facilities and
perform such other services as it may specify, by notification in the Official Gazette.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, service provider so authorised includes any
individual, private agency, private company, partnership firm, sole proprietor firm or any such other body
or agency which has been granted permission by the appropriate Government to offer services through
electronic means in accordance with the policy governing such service sector.
(2) The appropriate Government may also authorise any service provider authorised under
sub-section (1) to collect, retain and appropriate such service charges, as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government for the purpose of providing such services, from the person availing such
service.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the appropriate Government may authorise the service
providers to collect, retain and appropriate service charges under this section notwithstanding the fact that
there is no express provision under the Act, rule, regulation or notification under which the service is
provided to collect, retain and appropriate e-service charges by the service providers.
(4) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the scale of
service charges which may be charged and collected by the service providers under this section:
Provided that the appropriate Government may specify different scale of service charges for different
types of services.]
7. Retention of electronic records.—(1) Where any law provides that documents, records or
information shall be retained for any specific period, then, that requirement shall be deemed to have been
satisfied if such documents, records or information are retained in the electronic form, if—
(a) the information contained therein remains accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent
reference;
(b) the electronic record is retained in the format in which it was originally generated, sent or
received or in a format which can be demonstrated to represent accurately the information originally
generated, sent or received;
(c) the details which will facilitate the identification of the origin, destination, date and time of
despatch or receipt of such electronic record are available in the electronic record:
Provided that this clause does not apply to any information which is automatically generated
solely for the purpose of enabling an electronic record to be despatched or received.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any law that expressly provides for the retention of
documents, records or information in the form of electronic records.
2

[7A. Audit of documents, etc., maintained in electronic form.—Where in any law for the time
being in force, there is a provision for audit of documents, records or information, that provision shall also
be applicable for audit of documents, records or information processed and maintained in the electronic
form.]
8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette.—Where any law provides that any
rule, regulation, order, bye-law, notification or any other matter shall be published in the Official Gazette,
then, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such rule, regulation, order, bye-law,
notification or any other matter is published in the Official Gazette or Electronic Gazette:
Provided that where any rule, regulation, order, by-law, notification or any other matter is published
in the Official Gazette or Electronic Gazette, the date of publication shall be deemed to be the date of the
Gazette which was first published in any form.
9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right to insist document should be accepted in electronic
form.—Nothing contained in sections 6, 7 and 8 shall confer a right upon any person to insist that any
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 7 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

10

Ministry or Department of the Central Government or the State Government or any authority or body
established by or under any law or controlled or funded by the Central or State Government should
accept, issue, create, retain and preserve any document in the form of electronic records or effect any
monetary transaction in the electronic form.
10. Power to make rules by Central Government in respect of 1[electronic signature].—The
Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, by rules, prescribe—
(a) the type of 1[electronic signature];
(b) the manner and format in which the 1[electronic signature] shall be affixed;
(c) the manner or procedure which facilitates identification of the person affixing the 1[electronic
signature];
(d) control processes and procedures to ensure adequate integrity, security and confidentiality of
electronic records or payments; and
(e) any other matter which is necessary to give legal effect to 1[electronic signatures].
2

[10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means.—Where in a contract formation,
the communication of proposals, the acceptance of proposals, the revocation of proposals and
acceptances, as the case may be, are expressed in electronic form or by means of an electronic records,
such contract shall not be deemed to be unenforceable solely on the ground that such electronic form or
means was used for that purpose.]
CHAPTER IV
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS
11. Attribution of electronic records.—An electronic record shall be attributed to the originator—
(a) if it was sent by the originator himself;
(b) by a person who had the authority to act on behalf of the originator in respect of that
electronic record; or
(c) by an information system programmed by or on behalf of the originator to operate
automatically.
12. Acknowledgment of receipt.—(1) Where the originator has not 3[stipulated] that the
acknowledgment of receipt of electronic record be given in a particular form or by a particular method, an
acknowledgment may be given by—
(a) any communication by the addressee, automated or otherwise; or
(b) any conduct of the addressee, sufficient to indicate to the originator that the electronic record
has been received.
(2) Where the originator has stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only on receipt of an
acknowledgment of such electronic record by him, then unless acknowledgment has been so received, the
electronic record shall he deemed to have been never sent by the originator.
(3) Where the originator has not stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only on receipt
of such acknowledgment, and the acknowledgment has not been received by the originator within the
time specified or agreed or, if no time has been specified or agreed to within a reasonable time, then the
originator may give notice to the addressee stating that no acknowledgment has been received by him and
specifying a reasonable time by which the acknowledgment must be received by him and if no
acknowledgment is received within the aforesaid time limit he may after giving notice to the addressee,
treat the electronic record as though it has never been sent.
13. Time and place of despatch and receipt of electronic record.—(1) Save as otherwise agreed to
between the originator and the addressee, the despatch of an electronic record occurs when it enters a
computer resource outside the control of the originator.
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for ―digital signature‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for ―agreed with the addressee‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

11

(2) Save as otherwise agreed between the originator and the addressee, the time of receipt of an
electronic record shall be determined as follows, namely:—
(a) if the addressee has designated a computer resource for the purpose of receiving electronic
records,—
(i) receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record enters the designated computer
resource; or
(ii) if the electronic record is sent to a computer resource of the addressee that is not the
designated computer resource, receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record is retrieved
by the addressee;
(b) if the addressee has not designated a computer resource along with specified timings, if any,
receipt occurs when the electronic record enters the computer resource of the addressee.
(3) Save as otherwise agreed to between the originator and the addressee, an electronic record is
deemed to be despatched at the place where the originator has his place of business, and is deemed to be
received at the place where the addressee has his place of business.
(4) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply notwithstanding that the place where the computer
resource is located may be different from the place where the electronic record is deemed to have been
received under sub-section (3).
(5) For the purposes of this section,–
(a) if the originator or the addressee has more than one place of business, the principal place of
business, shall be the place of business;
(b) if the originator or the addressee does not have a place of business, his usual place of
residence shall be deemed to be the place of business;
(c) ―usual place of residence‖, in relation to a body corporate, means the place where it is
registered.
CHAPTER V
SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND SECURE 1[ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE]
14. Secure electronic record.—Where any security procedure has been applied to an electronic
record at a specific point of time, then such record shall he deemed to be a secure electronic record from
such point of time to the time of verification.
2

[15. Secure electronic signature.—An electronic signature shall be deemed to be a secure electronic
signature if—
(i) the signature creation data, at the time of affixing signature, was under the exclusive control of
signatory and no other person; and
(ii) the signature creation data was stored and affixed in such exclusive manner as may be
prescribed.
Explanation.–In case of digital signature, the ―signature creation data‖ means the private key of the
subscriber.
16. Security procedures and practices.—The Central Government may, for the purposes of sections
14 and 15, prescribe the security procedures and practices:
Provided that in prescribing such security procedures and practices, the Central Government shall
have regard to the commercial circumstances, nature of transactions and such other related factors as it
may consider appropriate.]
CHAPTER VI
REGULATION OF CERTIFYING AUTHORITIES
17. Appointment of Controller and other officers.—(1) The Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Controller of Certifying Authorities for the purposes of this
Act and may also by the same or subsequent notification appoint such number of Deputy Controllers
3
[, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees] as it deems fit.
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for ―digital signatures‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by s 11, ibid., for sections 15 and 16 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. Subs. by s.12, ibid., for ―and Assistant Controllers‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

12

(2) The Controller shall discharge his functions under this Act subject to the general control and
directions of the Central Government.
(3) The Deputy Controllers and Assistant Controllers shall perform the functions assigned to them by
the Controller under the general superintendence and control of the Controller.
(4) The qualifications, experience and terms and conditions of service of Controller, Deputy
Controllers 1[,Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees] shall be such as may be prescribed by
the Central Government.
(5) The Head Office and Branch Office of the office of the Controller shall be at such places as the
Central Government may specify, and these may be established at such places as the Central Government
may think fit.
(6) There shall be a seal of the Office of the Controller.
18. Functions of Controller.—The Controller may perform all or any of the following functions,
namely:–
(a) exercising supervision over the activities of the Certifying Authorities;
(b) certifying public keys of the Certifying Authorities;
(c) laying down the standards to be maintained by the Certifying Authorities;
(d) specifying the qualifications and experience which employees of the Certifying Authority
should possess;
(e) specifying the conditions subject to which the Certifying Authorities shall conduct their
business;
(f) specifying the contents of written, printed or visual materials and advertisements that may be
distributed or used in respect of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate and the public key;
(g) specifying the form and content of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate and the key;
(h) specifying the form and manner in which accounts shall be maintained by the Certifying
Authorities;
(i) specifying the terms and conditions subject to which auditors may be appointed and the
remuneration to be paid to them;
(j) facilitating the establishment of any electronic system by a Certifying Authority either solely
or jointly with other Certifying Authorities and regulation of such systems;
(k) specifying the manner in which the Certifying Authorities shall conduct their dealings with the
subscribers;
(l) resolving any conflict of interests between the Certifying Authorities and the subscribers;
(m) laying down the duties of the Certifying Authorities;
(n) maintaining a data base containing the disclosure record of every Certifying Authority
containing such particulars as may be specified by regulations, which shall be accessible to public.
19. Recognition of foreign Certifying Authorities.—(1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions
as may be specified by regulations, the Controller may with the previous approval of the Central
Government, and by notification in the Official Gazette, recognise any foreign Certifying Authority as a
Certifying Authority for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Where any Certifying Authority is recognised under sub-section (1), the 2[electronic signature]
Certificate issued by such Certifying Authority shall be valid for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Controller may, if he is satisfied that any Certifying Authority has contravened any of the
conditions and restrictions subject to which it was granted recognition under sub-section (1) he may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification in the Official Gazette, revoke such recognition.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 12, for ―Assistant Controllers‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for ―Digital Signature‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

13

20. [Controller to act as repository.] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2008 (10 of 2009), s. 13 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
21. Licence to issue 1[electronic signature] Certificates.—(1) Subject to the provisions of
sub-section (2), any person may make an application, to the Controller, for a licence to issue 1[electronic
signature] Certificates.
(2) No licence shall be issued under sub-section (1), unless the applicant fulfils such requirements
with respect to qualification, expertise, manpower, financial resources and other infrastructure facilities,
which are necessary to issue 1[electronic signature] Certificates as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) A licence granted under this section shall—
(a) be valid for such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government;
(b) not be transferable or heritable;
(c) be subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the regulations.
22. Application for licence.—(1) Every application for issue of a licence shall be in such form as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) Every application for issue of a licence shall be accompanied by—
(a) a certification practice statement;
(b) a statement including the procedures with respect to identification of the applicant;
(c) payment of such fees, not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees as may be prescribed by the
Central Government;
(d) such other documents, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
23. Renewal of licence.—An application for renewal of a licence shall be—
(a) in such form;
(b) accompanied by such fees, not exceeding five thousand rupees, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government and shall be made not less than forty-five days before the date of expiry of the
period of validity of the licence.
24. Procedure for grant or rejection of licence.—The Controller may, on receipt of an application
under sub-section (1) of section 21, after considering the documents accompanying the application and
such other factors, as he deems fit, grant the licence or reject the application:
Provided that no application shall be rejected under this section unless the applicant has been given a
reasonable opportunity of presenting his case.
25. Suspension of licence.—(1) The Controller may, if he is satisfied after making such inquiry, as
he may think fit, that a Certifying Authority has—
(a) made a statement in, or in relation to, the application for the issue or renewal of the licence,
which is incorrect or false in material particulars;
(b) failed to comply with the terms and conditions subject to which the licence was granted;
2

[(c) failed to maintain the procedures and standards specified in section 30;]

(d) contravened any provisions of this Act, rule, regulation or order made thereunder,
revoke the licence:
Provided that no licence shall be revoked unless the Certifying Authority has been given a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed revocation.
(2) The Controller may, if he has reasonable cause to believe that there is any ground for revoking a
licence under sub-section (1), by order suspend such licence pending the completion of any enquiry
ordered by him:
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for ―Digital Signature‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19-9-2002).

14

Provided that no licence shall be suspended for a period exceeding ten days unless the Certifying
Authority has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed suspension.
(3) No Certifying Authority whose licence has been suspended shall issue any 1[electronic signature]
Certificate during such suspension.
26. Notice of suspension or revocation of licence.—(1) Where the licence of the Certifying
Authority is suspended or revoked, the Controller shall publish notice of such suspension or revocation,
as the case may be, in the data base maintained by him.
(2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Controller shall publish notices of such
suspension or revocation, as the case may be, in all such repositories:
Provided that the data base containing the notice of such suspension or revocation, as the case may
be, shall be made available through a web site which shall be accessible round the clock:
Provided further that the Controller may, if he considers necessary, publicise the contents of data base
in such electronic or other media, as he may consider appropriate.
27. Power to delegate.—The Controller may, in writing, authorise the Deputy Controller, Assistant
Controller or any officer to exercise any of the powers of the Controller under this Chapter.
28. Power to investigate contraventions.—(1) The Controller or any officer authorised by him in
this behalf shall take up for investigation any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or
regulations made thereunder.
(2) The Controller or any officer authorised by him in this behalf shall exercise the like powers which
are conferred on Income-tax authorities under Chapter XIII of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), and
shall exercise such powers, subject to such limitations laid down under that Act.
29. Access to computers and data.—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1) of
section 69, the Controller or any person authorised by him shall, if he has reasonable cause to suspect that
2
[any contravention of the provisions of this Chapter] has been committed, have access to any computer
system, any apparatus, data or any other material connected with such system, for the purpose of
searching or causing a search to be made for obtaining any information or data contained in or available
to such computer system.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Controller or any person authorised by him may, by order,
direct any person in charge of, or otherwise concerned with the operation of, the computer system, data
apparatus or material, to provide him with such reasonable technical and other assistance as he may
consider necessary.
30. Certifying Authority to follow certain procedures.—Every Certifying Authority shall,—
(a) make use of hardware, software and procedures that are secure from intrusion and misuse;
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability in its services which are reasonably suited to the
performance of intended functions;
(c) adhere to security procedures to ensure that the secrecy and privacy of the 1[electronic
signatures] are assured; 3***
4

[(ca) be the repository of all electronic signature Certificates issued under this Act;

(cb) publish information regarding its practices, electronic signature Certificates and current
status of such certificates; and ]
(d) observe such other standards as may be specified by regulations.
31. Certifying Authority to ensure compliance of the Act, etc.—Every Certifying Authority shall
ensure that every person employed or otherwise engaged by it complies, in the course of his employment
or engagement, with the provisions of this Act, rules, regulations and orders made thereunder.
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for ―Digital Signature‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for ―any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations made thereunder‖
(w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. The word ―and‖ omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
4. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

15

32. Display of licence.—Every Certifying Authority shall display its licence at a conspicuous place
of the premises in which it carries on its business.
33. Surrender of licence.—(1) Every Certifying Authority whose licence is suspended or revoked
shall immediately after such suspension or revocation, surrender the licence to the Controller.
(2) Where any Certifying Authority fails to surrender a licence under sub-section (1), the person in
whose favour a licence is issued, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be punished with imprisonment
which may extend up to six months or a fine which may extend up to ten thousand rupees or with both.
34. Disclosure.–(1) Every Certifying Authority shall disclose in the manner specified by
regulations—
(a) its 1[electronic signature] Certificate 2***;
(b) any certification practice statement relevant thereto;
(c) notice of the revocation or suspension of its Certifying Authority certificate, if any; and
(d) any other fact that materially and adversely affects either the reliability of a 1[electronic signature]
Certificate, which that Authority has issued, or the Authority's ability to perform its services.
(2) Where in the opinion of the Certifying Authority any event has occurred or any situation has
arisen which may materially and adversely affect the integrity of its computer system or the conditions
subject to which a 1[electronic signature] Certificate was granted, then, the Certifying Authority shall–
(a) use reasonable efforts to notify any person who is likely to be affected by that occurrence; or
(b) act in accordance with the procedure specified in its certification practice statement to deal
with such event or situation.
CHAPTERVII
1

[ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE] CERTIFICATES

35. Certifying authority to issue 1[electronic signature] Certificate.—(1) Any person may make an
application to the Certifying Authority for the issue of a 1[electronic signature] Certificate in such form as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) Every such application shall be accompanied by such fee not exceeding twenty-five thousand
rupees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to be paid to the Certifying Authority:
Provided that while prescribing fees under sub-section (2) different fees may be prescribed for
different classes of applicants.
(3) Every such application shall be accompanied by a certification practice statement or where there is
no such statement, a statement containing such particulars, as may be specified by regulations.
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Certifying Authority may, after
consideration of the certification practice statement or the other statement under sub-section (3) and after
making such enquiries as it may deem fit, grant the 1[electronic signature] Certificate or for reasons to be
recorded in writing, reject the application:
3

*

*

*

*

*

4

[Provided] that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed rejection.
36. Representations upon issuance of Digital Signature Certificate.—A Certifying Authority
while issuing a Digital Signature Certificate shall certify that—
(a) it has complied with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder;
(b) it has published the Digital Signature Certificate or otherwise made it available to such person
relying on it and the subscriber has accepted it;
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for ―Digital Signature‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Certain words omitted by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. The first proviso omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
4. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for ―Provided further‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

16

(c) the subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key, listed in the Digital
Signature Certificate;
1

[(ca) the subscriber holds a private key which is capable of creating a digital signature;

(cb) the public key to be listed in the certificate can be used to verify a digital signature affixed by
the private key held by the subscriber;]
(d) the subscriber's public key and private key constitute a functioning key pair;
(e) the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate is accurate; and
(f) it has no knowledge of any material fact, which if it had been included in the Digital Signature
Certificate would adversely affect the reliability of the representations in clauses (a) to (d).
37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate.–(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the
Certifying Authority which has issued a Digital Signature Certificate may suspend such Digital Signature
Certificate,–
(a) on receipt of a request to that effect from–
(i) the subscriber listed in the Digital Signature Certificate; or
(ii) any person duly authorised to act on behalf of that subscriber;
(b) if it is of opinion that the Digital Signature Certificate should be suspended in public interest.
(2) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be suspended for a period exceeding fifteen days unless
the subscriber has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(3) On suspension of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying Authority shall
communicate the same to the subscriber.
38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate.–(1) A Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital
Signature Certificate issued by it–
(a) where the subscriber or any other person authorised by him makes a request to that effect; or
(b) upon the death of the subscriber; or
(c) upon the dissolution of the firm or winding up of the company where the subscriber is a firm
or a company.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) and without prejudice to the provisions of
sub-section (1), a Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital Signature Certificate which has been issued
by it at any time, if it is of opinion that–
(a) a material fact represented in the Digital Signature Certificate is false or has been concealed;
(b) a requirement for issuance of the Digital Signature Certificate was not satisfied;
(c) the Certifying Authority's private key or security system was compromised in a manner
materially affecting the Digital Signature Certificate's reliability;
(d) the subscriber has been declared insolvent or dead or where a subscriber is a firm or a
company, which has been dissolved, wound-up or otherwise ceased to exist.
(3) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be revoked unless the subscriber has been given an
opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(4) On revocation of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying Authority shall
communicate the same to the subscriber.
39. Notice of suspension or revocation.–(1) Where a Digital Signature Certificate is suspended or
revoked under section 37 or section 38, the Certifying Authority shall publish a notice of such suspension
or revocation, as the case may be, in the repository specified in the Digital Signature Certificate for
publication of such notice.

1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 18 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

17

(2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Certifying Authority shall publish notices of
such suspension or revocation, as the case may be, in all such repositories.
CHAPTER VIII
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS
40. Generating key pair.–Where any Digital Signature Certificate the public key of which
corresponds to the private key of that subscriber which is to be listed in the Digital Signature Certificate
has been accepted by a subscriber, 1*** the subscriber shall generate 2[that key] pair by applying the
security procedure.
3

[40A. Duties of subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate.–In respect of Electronic Signature
Certificate the subscriber shall perform such duties as may be prescribed.]
41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate.–(1) A subscriber shall be deemed to have accepted
a Digital Signature Certificate if he publishes or authorises the publication of a Digital Signature
Certificate–
(a) to one or more persons;
(b) in a repository; or
otherwise demonstrates his approval of the Digital Signature Certificate in any manner.
(2) By accepting a Digital Signature Certificate the subscriber certifies to all who reasonably rely on
the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate that–
(a) the subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital
Signature Certificate and is entitled to hold the same;
(b) all representations made by the subscriber to the Certifying Authority and all material relevant
to the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate are true;
(c) all information in the Digital Signature Certificate that is within the knowledge of the
subscriber is true.
42. Control of private key.–(1) Every subscriber shall exercise reasonable care to retain control of
the private key corresponding to the public key listed in his Digital Signature Certificate and take all steps
to prevent its disclosure 4***.
(2) If the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate has
been compromised, then, the subscriber shall communicate the same without any delay to the Certifying
Authority in such manner as may be specified by the regulations.
Explanation.–For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the subscriber shall be liable till he
has informed the Certifying Authority that the private key has been compromised.
CHAPTER IX
5

[PENALTIES, COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION]

6

43. [Penalty and compensation] for damage to computer, computer system, etc.–If any person
without permission of the owner or any other person who is in charge of a computer, computer system or
computer network,–
(a) accesses or secures access to such computer, computer system or computer network
[or computer resource];

7

1. The word ―then‖ omitted by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19-9-2002).
2. Subs. ibid., for ―the key‖ (w.e.f. 19-9-2002).
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 19 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
4. The words ―to a person not authorised to affix the digital signature of the subscriber‖ omitted by notification No. S.O.1015(E)
(w.e.f. 19-9-2002).
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 20, for ―PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for ―Penalty‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
7. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

18

(b) downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer data base or information from such
computer, computer system or computer network including information or data held or stored in any
removable storage medium;
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any computer contaminant or computer virus into any
computer, computer system or computer network;
(d) damages or causes to be damaged any computer, computer system or computer network, data,
computer data base or any other programmes residing in such computer, computer system or
computer network;
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of any computer, computer system or computer network;
(f) denies or causes the denial of access to any person authorised to access any computer,
computer system or computer network by any means;
(g) provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access to a computer, computer system or
computer network in contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations made
thereunder;
(h) charges the services availed of by a person to the account of another person by tampering with
or manipulating any computer, computer system, or computer network;
1

[(i) destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a computer resource or diminishes its
value or utility or affects it injuriously by any means;
(j) steal, conceal, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any
computer source code used for a computer resource with an intention to cause damage;]
2

[he shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation to the person so affected.]
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section,–
(i) ―computer contaminant‖ means any set of computer instructions that are designed–
(a) to modify, destroy, record, transmit data or programme residing within a computer,
computer system or computer network; or
(b) by any means to usurp the normal operation of the computer, computer system, or
computer network;
(ii) ―computer data-base‖ means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or
instructions in text, image, audio, video that are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised
manner or have been produced by a computer, computer system or computer network and are
intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network;
(iii) ―computer virus‖ means any computer instruction, information, data or programme that
destroys, damages, degrades or adversely affects the performance of a computer resource or attaches
itself to another computer resource and operates when a programme, data or instruction is executed or
some other event takes place in that computer resource;
(iv) ―damage‖ means to destroy, alter, delete, add, modify or rearrange any computer resource by
any means.
[(v) ―computer source code‖ means the listing of programme, computer commands, design and
layout and programme analysis of computer resource in any form.]
1

3

[43A. Compensation for failure to protect data.–Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or
handling any sensitive personal data or information in a computer resource which it owns, controls or
operates, is negligent in implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices and procedures and
thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such body corporate shall be liable to pay
damages by way of compensation to the person so affected.

1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 21 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

19

Explanation.–For the purposes of this section,–
(i) ―body corporate‖ means any company and includes a firm, sole proprietorship or other
association of individuals engaged in commercial or professional activities;
(ii) ―reasonable security practices and procedures‖ means security practices and procedures
designed to protect such information from unauthorised access, damage, use, modification, disclosure
or impairment, as may be specified in an agreement between the parties or as may be specified in any
law for the time being in force and in the absence of such agreement or any law, such reasonable
security practices and procedures, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation
with such professional bodies or associations as it may deem fit;
(iii) ―sensitive personal data or information‖ means such personal information as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with such professional bodies or associations as
it may deem fit.]
44. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc.–If any person who is required under this
Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder to–
(a) furnish any document, return or report to the Controller or the Certifying Authority fails to
furnish the same, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding one lakh and fifty thousand rupees for
each such failure;
(b) file any return or furnish any information, books or other documents within the time specified
therefor in the regulations fails to file return or furnish the same within the time specified therefor in
the regulations, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five thousand rupees for every day during
which such failure continues;
(c) maintain books of account or records, fails to maintain the same, he shall be liable to a penalty
not exceeding ten thousand rupees for every day during which the failure continues.
45. Residuary penalty.–Whoever contravenes any rules or regulations made under this Act, for the
contravention of which no penalty has been separately provided, shall be liable to pay a compensation not
exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees to the person affected by such contravention or a penalty not
exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees.
46. Power to adjudicate.–(1) For the purpose of adjudging under this Chapter whether any person
has committed a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, 1[direction or
order made thereunder which renders him liable to pay penalty or compensation,] the Central Government
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), appoint any officer not below the rank of a Director to
the Government of India or an equivalent officer of a State Government to be an adjudicating officer for
holding an inquiry in the manner prescribed by the Central Government.
2

[(1A) The adjudicating officer appointed under sub-section (1) shall exercise jurisdiction to
adjudicate matters in which the claim for injury or damage does not exceed rupees five crore:
Provided that the jurisdiction in respect of the claim for injury or damage exceeding rupees five
crores shall vest with the competent court.]
(2) The adjudicating officer shall, after giving the person referred to in sub-section (1) a reasonable
opportunity for making representation in the matter and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person
has committed the contravention, he may impose such penalty or award such compensation as he thinks
fit in accordance with the provisions of that section.
(3) No person shall be appointed as an adjudicating officer unless he possesses such experience in the
field of Information Technology and legal or judicial experience as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(4) Where more than one adjudicating officers are appointed, the Central Government shall specify by
order the matters and places with respect to which such officers shall exercise their jurisdiction.
(5) Every adjudicating officer shall have the powers of a civil court which are conferred on the
―Appellate Tribunal‖ under sub-section (2) of section 58, and–
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 23, for ―direction or order made thereunder‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

20

(a) all proceedings before it shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);
(b) shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);
1
[(c) shall be deemed to be a civil court for purposes of Order XXI of the Civil Procedure Code,
1908 (5 of 1908).]
47. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer.–While adjudging the quantum of
compensation under this Chapter, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the following factors,
namely:–
(a) the amount of gain of unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, made as a result of the default;
(b) the amount of loss caused to any person as a result of the default;
(c) the repetitive nature of the default.
CHAPTER X
2

THE [APPELLATE TRIBUNAL]
3

4

48. [Appellate Tribunal].– [(1) The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal
established under section 14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997), shall,
on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), be the
Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.]
(2) The Central Government 5[shall specify, by notification] the matters and places in relation to
which the 2[Appellate Tribunal] may exercise jurisdiction.
6

[49. [Composition of Cyber Appellate Tribunal.] Omitted by the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017),
s. 169 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
50. [Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson and Members of Cyber Appellate
Tribunal.] Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
51. [Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and Members.] Omitted by s. 169,
ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
52. [Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and
Members.] Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
52A. [Powers of superintendence, direction, etc.] Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
52B. [Distribution of business among Benches.] Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
52C. [Power of Chairperson to transfer cases.] Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
52D. Decision by majority.–If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in opinion
on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the
Chairperson of the 2[Appellate Tribunal] who shall hear the point or points himself and such point or
points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it.]
53. [Filling up of vacancies.] Omitted by the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 169
(w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
54. [Resignation and removal.] Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings.–No
order of the Central Government appointing any person as the 7[Chairperson or the Member] of a
2
[Appellate Tribunal] shall be called in question in any manner and no act or proceeding before a
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 23 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for ―Cyber Appellate Tribunal‖ (w.e.f. 26-5-2017)
3. Subs. by s. 169, ibid., for ― Establishment of Appellate Tribunal‖ (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
4. Subs. by s. 169, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
5. Subs. by s. 169, ibid., for ―shall also specify, in the notification referred to in sub-section (1)‖ (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 26, for sections 49 to 52 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
7. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for ―Presiding Officer‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

21

1

[Appellate Tribunal] shall be called in question in any manner on the ground merely of any defect in the
constitution of a 1[Appellate Tribunal].
56. [Staff of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal.] Omitted by the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 169
(w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
57. Appeal to 1[Appellate Tribunal].–(1) Save as provided in sub-section (2), any person aggrieved
by an order made by controller or an adjudicating officer under this Act may prefer an appeal to a
1
[Appellate Tribunal] having jurisdiction in the matter.
(2) No appeal shall lie to the 1[Appellate Tribunal] from an order made by an adjudicating officer
with the consent of the parties.
(3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty-five days from the date
on which a copy of the order made by the Controller or the adjudicating officer is received by the person
aggrieved and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that the 1[Appellate Tribunal] may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of
forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the 1[Appellate Tribunal] may, after giving the
parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming,
modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.
(5) The 1[Appellate Tribunal] shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal
and to the concerned Controller or adjudicating officer.
(6) The appeal filed before the 1[Appellate Tribunal] under sub-section (1) shall be dealt with by it as
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within six
months from the date of receipt of the appeal.
58. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal].–(1) The 1[Appellate Tribunal] shall not be
bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided
by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules, the
1
[Appellate Tribunal] shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the place at which it shall
have its sittings.
(2) The 1[Appellate Tribunal] shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act,
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:–
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents or other electronic records;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) reviewing its decisions;
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Every proceeding before the 1[Appellate Tribunal] shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860) and the 1[Appellate Tribunal] shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
59. Right to legal representation.–The appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or
more legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the 1[Appellate Tribunal].
60. Limitation.–The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall, as far as may be,
apply to an appeal made to the 1[Appellate Tribunal].

1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s, 169, for ―Cyber Appellate Tribunal‖ (w.e.f. 26-5-2017)

22

61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.–No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or
proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer appointed under this Act or the
1
[Appellate Tribunal] constituted under this Act is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.
62. Appeal to High Court.–Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the 1[Appellate
Tribunal] may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the
decision or order of the 1[Appellate Tribunal] to him on any question of fact or law arising out of such
order:
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding
sixty days.
63. Compounding of contraventions.–(1) Any contravention under this 2[Act] may, either before or
after the institution of adjudication proceedings, be compounded by the Controller or such other officer as
may be specially authorised by him in this behalf or by the adjudicating officer, as the case may be,
subject to such conditions as the Controller or such other officer or the adjudicating officer may specify:
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the penalty which may
be imposed under this Act for the contravention so compounded.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a person who commits the same or similar contravention
within a period of three years from the date on which the first contravention, committed by him, was
compounded.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this sub-section, any second or subsequent contravention
committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the contravention was
previously compounded shall be deemed to be a first contravention.
(3) Where any contravention has been compounded under sub-section (1), no proceeding or further
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the person guilty of such contravention in respect of
the contravention so compounded.
64. Recovery of 3[penalty or compensation].–A 4[penalty imposed or compensation awarded] under
this Act, if it is not paid, shall he recovered as an arrear of land revenue and the licence or the 5[electronic
signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be suspended till the penalty is paid.
CHAPTER XI
OFFENCES
65. Tampering with computer source documents.–Whoever knowingly or intentionally conceals,
destroys or alters or intentionally or knowingly causes another to conceal, destroy, or alter any computer
source code used for a computer, computer programme, computer system or computer network, when the
computer source code is required to be kept or maintained by law for the time being in force, shall be
punishable with imprisonment up to three years, or with fine which may extend up to two lakh rupees, or
with both.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, ―computer source code‖ means the listing of
programmes, computer commands, design and layout and programme analysis of computer resource in
any form.
6

[66. Computer related offences.–If any person, dishonestly or fraudulently, does any act referred to
in section 43, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.

1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for ―Cyber Appellate Tribunal‖ (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19-9-2002).
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 31, for ―penalty‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for ―penalty imposed‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for ―Digital Signature‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
6. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for sections 66 and 67 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

23

Explanation.–For the purposes of this section,–
(a) the word ―dishonestly‖ shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 24 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860);
(b) the word ―fraudulently‖ shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 25 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860).
1

[66A. Punishment for sending offensive messages through communication service, etc.–Any
person who sends, by means of a computer resource or a communication device,–
(a) any information that is grossly offensive or has menacing character; or
(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of causing annoyance,
inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, injury, criminal intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will,
persistently by making use of such computer resource or a communication device;
(c) any electronic mail or electronic mail message for the purpose of causing annoyance or
inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or recipient about the origin of such
messages,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, terms ―electronic mail‖ and ―electronic mail message‖
means a message or information created or transmitted or received on a computer, computer system,
computer resource or communication device including attachments in text, image, audio, video and any
other electronic record, which may be transmitted with the message.]
66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication
device.–Whoever dishonestly receive or retains any stolen computer resource or communication device
knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen computer resource or communication device,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh or with both.
66C. Punishment for identity theft.–Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly make use of the
electronic signature, password or any other unique identification feature of any other person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall
also be liable to fine which may extend to rupees one lakh.
66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource.–Whoever, by means of
any communication device or computer resource cheats by personation, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
66E. Punishment for violation of privacy.–Whoever, intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes
or transmits the image of a private area of any person without his or her consent, under circumstances
violating the privacy of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years
or with fine not exceeding two lakh rupees, or with both.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section–
(a) ―transmit‖ means to electronically send a visual image with the intent that it be viewed by a
person or persons;
(b) ―capture‖, with respect to an image, means to videotape, photograph, film or record by any
means;
(c) ―private area‖ means the naked or undergarment clad genitals, public area, buttocks or female
breast:
(d) ―publishes‖ means reproduction in the printed or electronic form and making it available for
public;

1. Section 66A has been struck down by Supreme Court’s Order dated 24th March, 2015 in the Shreya Singhal vs. Union of India,
AIR 2015 SC. 1523.

24

(e) ―under circumstances violating privacy‖ means circumstances in which a person can have a
reasonable expectation that–
(i) he or she could disrobe in privacy, without being concerned that an image of his private
area was being captured; or
(ii) any part of his or her private area would not be visible to the public, regardless of whether
that person is in a public or private place.
66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism.–(1) Whoever,–
(A) with intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or to strike terror in
the people or any section of the people by–
(i) denying or cause the denial of access to any person authorised to access computer
resource; or
(ii) attempting to penetrate or access a computer resource without authorisation or exceeding
authorised access; or
(iii) introducing or causing to introduce any computer contaminant,
and by means of such conduct causes or is likely to cause death or injuries to persons or damage to or
destruction of property or disrupts or knowing that it is likely to cause damage or disruption of supplies or
services essential to the life of the community or adversely affect the critical information infrastructure
specified under section 70; or
(B) knowingly or intentionally penetrates or accesses a computer resource without authorisation or
exceeding authorised access, and by means of such conduct obtains access to information, data or
computer data base that is restricted for reasons of the security of the State or foreign relations; or any
restricted information, data or computer data base, with reasons to believe that such information, data
or computer data base so obtained may be used to cause or likely to cause injury to the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States,
public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an
offence, or to the advantage of any foreign nation, group of individuals or otherwise,
commits the offence of cyber terrorism.
(2) Whoever commits or conspires to commit cyber terrorism shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to imprisonment for life.
67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form.–Whoever
publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the electronic form, any material which
is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt
persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter
contained or embodied in it, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and in the
event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act, etc.,
in electronic form.–Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the
electronic form any material which contains sexually explicit act or conduct shall be punished on first
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and with
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and also with fine which
may extend to ten lakh rupees.
67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually
explicit act, etc., in electronic form.–Whoever,–
(a) publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted material in any electronic form
which depicts children engaged in sexually explicit act or conduct; or
(b) creates text or digital images, collects, seeks, browses, downloads, advertises, promotes,
exchanges or distributes material in any electronic form depicting children in obscene or indecent or
sexually explicit manner; or
25

(c) cultivates, entices or induces children to online relationship with one or more children for and
on sexually explicit act or in a manner that may offend a reasonable adult on the computer resource; or
(d) facilitates abusing children online, or
(e) records in any electronic form own abuse or that of others pertaining to sexually explicit act
with children,
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and also
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees:
Provided that provisions of section 67, section 67A and this section does not extend to any book,
pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting representation or figure in electronic form–
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the ground
that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting representation or figure is the interest
of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used for bona fide heritage or religious purposes.
Explanation–For the purposes of this section, ―children‖ means a person who has not completed the
age of 18 years.
67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries.–(1) Intermediary shall preserve
and retain such information as may be specified for such duration and in such manner and format as the
Central Government may prescribe.
(2) any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1)
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also be liable to
fine.]
68. Power of Controller to give directions.–(1) The Controller may, by order, direct a Certifying
Authority or any employee of such Authority to take such measures or cease carrying on such activities as
specified in the order if those are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act, rules or
any regulations made thereunder.
1

[(2) Any person who intentionally or knowingly fails to comply with any order under sub-section (1)
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
two years or a fine not exceeding one lakh rupees or with both.]
2

[69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information
through any computer resource.–(1) Where the Central Government or a State Government or any of
its officers specially authorised by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be,
in this behalf may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, in the interest of the sovereignty
or integrity of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public
order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above or for
investigation of any offence, it may subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), for reasons to be recorded
in writing, by order, direct any agency of the appropriate Government to intercept, monitor or decrypt or
cause to be intercepted or monitored or decrypted any information generated, transmitted, received or
stored in any computer resource.
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such interception or monitoring or decryption may
be carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The subscriber or intermediary or any person in-charge of the computer resource shall, when called
upon by any agency referred to in sub-section (1), extend all facilities and technical assistance to–
(a) provide access to or secure access to the computer resource generating, transmitting, receiving
or storing such information; or
(b) intercept, monitor, or decrypt the information, as the case may be; or
(c) provide information stored in computer resource.
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 33, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for section 69 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

26

(4) The subscriber or intermediary or any person who fails to assist the agency referred to in
sub-section (3) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine.
69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through any
computer resource.–(1) Where the Central Government or any of its officers specially authorised by it in
this behalf is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, in the interest of sovereignty and integrity
of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for
preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above, it may subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, direct any agency of the
Government or intermediary to block for access by the public or cause to be blocked for access by the
public any information generated, transmitted, received, stored or hosted in any computer resource.
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such blocking for access by the public may be
carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The intermediary who fails to comply with the direction issued under sub-section (1) shall be
punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and also be liable to fine.
69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information through any
computer resource for cyber security.–(1) The Central Government may, to enhance cyber security and
for identification, analysis and prevention of intrusion or spread of computer contaminant in the country,
by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise any agency of the Government to monitor and collect
traffic data or information generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer resource.
(2) The intermediary or any person in-charge or the computer resource shall, when called upon by the
agency which has been authorised under sub-section (1), provide technical assistance and extend all
facilities to such agency to enable online access or to secure and provide online access to the computer
resource generating, transmitting, receiving or storing such traffic data or information.
(3) The procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information, shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(4) Any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of sub-section (2)
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which any extend to three years and shall also be liable
to fine.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section,–
(i) ―computer contaminant‖ shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 43;
(ii) ―traffic data‖ means any data identifying or purporting to identify any person, computer
system or computer network or location to or from which the communication is or may be
transmitted and includes communications origin, destination, route, time, data, size, duration or
type of underlying service and any other information.]
70. Protected system.–1[(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare any computer resource which directly or indirectly affects the facility of Critical Information
Infrastructure, to be a protected system.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, ―Critical Information Infrastructure‖ means the
computer resource, the incapacitation or destruction of which, shall have debilitating impact on national
security, economy, public health or safety.]
(2) The appropriate Government may, by order in writing, authorise the persons who are authorised to
access protected systems notified under sub-section (1).
(3) Any person who secures access or attempts to secure access to a protected system in contravention
of the provisions of this section shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
2
[(4) The Central Government shall prescribe the information security practices and procedures for
such protected system.]
3
[70A. National nodal agency.–(1) The Central Government may, by notification published in the
Official Gazette, designate any organisation of the Government as the national nodal agency in respect of
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 35, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

27

(2) The national nodal agency designated under sub-section (1) shall be responsible for all measures
including Research and Development relating to protection of Critical Information Infrastructure.
(3) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
such as may be prescribed.
70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as national agency for incident
response.–(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint an agency of
the Government to be called the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team.
(2) The Central Government shall provide the agency referred to in sub-section (1) with a Director
General and such other officers and employees as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances and terms and conditions of the Director-General and other officers and
employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team shall serve as the national agency for
performing the following functions in the area of cyber security,–
(a) collection, analysis and dissemination of information on cyber incidents;
(b) forecast and alerts of cyber security incidents;
(c) emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents;
(d) coordination of cyber incidents response activities;
(e) issue guidelines, advisories, vulnerability notes and white papers relating to information
security practices, procedures, preventation, response and reporting of cyber incidents;
(f) such other functions relating to cyber security as may be prescribed.
(5) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(6) For carrying out the provisions of sub-section (4), the agency referred to in sub-section (1) may
call for information and give direction to the service providers, intermediaries, data centres, body
corporate and any other person.
(7) Any service provider, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate or person who fails to provide
the information called for or comply with the direction under sub-section (6), shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees
or with both.
(8) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this section, except on a complaint made by an
officer authorised in this behalf by the agency referred to in sub-section (1).]
71. Penalty for misrepresentation.–Whoever makes any misrepresentation to, or suppresses any
material fact from the Controller or the Certifying Authority for obtaining any licence or 1[electronic
signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
72. Penalty for Breach of confidentiality and privacy.–Save as otherwise provided in this Act or
any other law for the time being in force, if any person who, in pursuance of any of the powers conferred
under this Act, rules or regulations made thereunder, has secured access to any electronic record, book,
register, correspondence, information, document or other material without the consent of the person
concerned discloses such electronic record, book, register, correspondence, information, document or
other material to any other person shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
2

[72A. Punishment for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract.–Save as otherwise
provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, any person including an intermediary
who, while providing services under the terms of lawful contract, has secured access to any material
containing personal information about another person, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for ―Digital Signature‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Ins. by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

28

to cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain discloses, without the consent of the person concerned, or in
breach of a lawful contract, such material to any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.]
73. Penalty for publishing 1[electronic signature] Certificate false in certain particulars.–(1) No
person shall publish a 1[electronic signature] Certificate or otherwise make it available to any other person
with the knowledge that–
(a) the Certifying Authority listed in the certificate has not issued it; or
(b) the subscriber listed in the certificate has not accepted it; or
(c) the certificate has been revoked or suspended,
unless such publication is for the purpose of verifying a 1[electronic signature] created prior to such
suspension or revocation.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees, or with both.
74. Publication for fraudulent purpose.–Whoever knowingly creates, publishes or otherwise makes
available a 1[electronic signature] Certificate for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees, or with both.
75. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India.–(1) Subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of this Act shall apply also to any offence or contravention
committed outside India by any person irrespective of his nationality.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), this Act shall apply to an offence or contravention committed
outside India by any person if the act or conduct constituting the offence or contravention involves a
computer, computer system or computer network located in India.
76. Confiscation.–Any computer, computer system, floppies, compact disks, tape drives or any other
accessories related thereto, in respect of which any provision of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made
thereunder has been or is being contravened, shall be liable to confiscation:
Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the court adjudicating the confiscation that
the person in whose possession, power or control of any such computer, computer system, floppies,
compact disks, tape drives or any other accessories relating thereto is found is not responsible for the
contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder, the court may,
instead of making an order for confiscation of such computer, computer system, floppies, compact disks,
tape drives or any other accessories related thereto, make such other order authorised by this Act against
the person contravening of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder as it
may think fit.
1

[77. Compensation, penalties or confiscation not to interfere with other punishment.–No
compensation awarded, penalty imposed or confiscation made under this Act shall prevent the award of
compensation or imposition of any other penalty or punishment under any other law for the time being in
force.
77A. Compounding of offences.–A court of competent jurisdiction may compound offences, other
than offences for which the punishment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding three years has
been provided, under this Act:
Provided that the court shall not compound such offence where the accused is, by reason of his
previous conviction, liable to either enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind:
Provided further that the court shall not compound any offence where such offence affects the socio
economic conditions of the country or has been committed against a child below the age of 18 years or a
woman.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 38, for section 77 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

29

(2) The person accused of an offence under this Act may file an application for compounding in the
court in which offence is pending for trial and the provisions of sections 265B and 265C of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply.
77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable.–Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the offence punishable with imprisonment of three
years and above shall be cognizable and the offence punishable with imprisonment of three years shall be
bailable.]
78. Power to investigate offences.–Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a police officer not below the rank of 1[Inspector] shall investigate any
offence under this Act.
2

[CHAPTER XII

INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES
79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases.–(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in any law for the time being in force but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3),
an intermediary shall not be liable for any third party information, data, or communication link made
available or hosted by him.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if–
(a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a communication system over
which information made available by third parties is transmitted or temporarily stored or hosted; or
(b) the intermediary does not–
(i) initiate the transmission,
(ii) select the receiver of the transmission, and
(iii) select or modify the information contained in the transmission;
(c) the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties under this Act and also
observes such other guidelines as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if–
(a) the intermediary has conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether by threats or promise or
otherwise in the commission of the unlawful act;
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the appropriate Government or its
agency that any information, data or communication link residing in or connected to a computer
resource controlled by the intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the intermediary
fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that material on that resource without vitiating the
evidence in any manner.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, the expression ―third party information‖ means any
information dealt with by an intermediary in his capacity as an intermediary.
CHAPTER XIIA
EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE
79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence.–The Central Government
may, for the purposes of providing expert opinion on electronic form evidence before any court or other
authority specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, any Department, body or agency of the Central
Government or a State Government as an Examiner of Electronic Evidence.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section, ―electronic form evidence‖ means any information of
probative value that is either stored or transmitted in electronic form and includes computer evidence,
digital audio, digital video, cell phones, digital fax machines.]

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 39, for ―Deputy Superintendent of Police‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by, s. 40, ibid., for Chapter XII (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

30

CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc.–(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any police officer, not below the rank of a
1
[Inspector], or any other officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorised by the
Central Government in this behalf may enter any public place and search and arrest without warrant any
person found therein who is reasonably suspected of having committed or of committing or of being
about to commit any offence under this Act.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression ―public place‖ includes any public
conveyance, any hotel, any shop or any other place intended for use by, or accessible to the public.
(2) Where any person is arrested under sub-section (1) by an officer other than a police officer, such
officer shall, without unnecessary delay, take or send the person arrested before a magistrate having
jurisdiction in the case or before the officer-in-charge of a police station.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall, subject to the provisions
of this section, apply, so far as may be, in relation to any entry, search or arrest, made under this section.
81. Act to have overriding effect.–The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
2

[Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall restrict any person from exercising any right
conferred under the Copyright Act, 1957 (14 of 1957) or the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970).]
3

[81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated cheque.–(1) The provisions of
this Act, for the time being in force, shall apply to, or in relation to, electronic cheques and the truncated
cheques subject to such modifications and amendments as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) by the Central Government, in consultation with the
Reserve Bank of India, by notification in the Official Gazette.
(2) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not
be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that notification.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this Act, the expressions ―electronic cheque‖ and ―truncated cheque‖
shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in section 6 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26
of 1881).]
4

[82. Controller, Deputy Controller and Assistant Controller to be public servants.–The
Controller, the Deputy Controller and the Assistant Controllers shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]
83. Power to give directions.–The Central Government may give directions to any State Government
as to the carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation
or order made thereunder.
84. Protection of action taken in good faith.–No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Central Government, the State Government, the Controller or any person acting on behalf of
him, 5[and adjudicating officers] for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of this Act or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 41, for ―Deputy Superintendent of Police‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Ins. by s. 42, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002, s. 13 (w.e.f. 26-2-2003).
4. Subs. by 7 of 2017, s. 169, for section 82 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017)
5. Subs. by s. 169, ibid., for ― the Chairperson Members, adjudicating officers and the staff of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal‖
(w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

31

1

[84A. Modes or methods for encryption.–The Central Government may, for secure use of the
electronic medium and for promotion of e-governance and e-commerce, prescribe the modes or methods
for encryption.
84B. Punishment for abetment of offences.–Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence under this Act.
Explanation.–An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, when it is
committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which
constitutes the abetment.
84C. Punishment for attempt to commit offences.–Whoever attempts to commit an offence
punishable by this Act or causes such an offence to be committed, and in such an attempt does any act
towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made for the punishment of
such attempt, be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term
which may extend to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.]
85. Offences by companies.–(1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct
of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to punishment if
he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a
company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section,–
(i) ―company‖ means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;
and
(ii) ―director‖, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
86. Removal of difficulties.–(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years from
the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament.
87. Power of Central Government to make rules.–(1) The Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette and in the Electronic Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–
2

[(a) the conditions for considering reliability of electronic signature or electronic authentication
technique under sub-section (2) of section 3A;

1. Ins. by 10 of 2009, s. 45 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for clause (a) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

32

(aa) the procedure for ascertaining electronic signature or authentication under sub-section (3) of
section 3A;
(ab) the manner in which any information or matter may be authenticated by means of electronic
signature under section 5;]
(b) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant or payment shall be effected under sub-section
(1) of section 6;
(c) the manner and format in which electronic records shall be filed, or issued and the method of
payment under sub-section (2) of section 6;
1

[(ca) the manner in which the authorised service provider may collect, retain and appropriate
service charges under sub-section (2) of section 6A;]
(d) the matters relating to the type of 2[electronic signature], manner and format in which it may be
affixed under section 10;
3

[(e) the manner of storing and affixing electronic signature creation data under section 15;

(ea) the security procedures and practices under section 16;]
(f) the qualifications, experience and terms and conditions of service of Controller, Deputy
Controllers 4[, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees] under section 17;
5

*

*

*

*

*

(h) the requirements which an applicant must fulfil under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(i) the period of validity of licence granted under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 21;
(j) the form in which an application for licence may be made under sub-section (1) of section 22;
(k) the amount of fees payable under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 22;
(l) such other documents which shall accompany an application for licence under clause (d) of subsection (2) of section 22;
(m) the form and the fee for renewal of a licence and the fee payable thereof under section 23;
6

[(ma) the form of application and fee for issue of Electronic Signature Certificate under
section 35;]
(n) the form in which application for issue of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate may be made
under sub-section (1) of section 35;
(o) the fee to be paid to the Certifying Authority for issue of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate
under sub-section (2) of section 35;
1

[(oa) the duties of subscribers under section 40A;

(ob) the reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive personal data or information
under section 43A;]
(p) the manner in which the adjudicating officer shall hold inquiry under sub-section (1) of section
46;
(q) the qualification and experience which the adjudicating officer shall possess under sub-section
(3) of section 46;
7

*

*

*

*

(u) the form in which appeal may be filed and the fee thereof under sub-section (3) of section 57;

1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 46 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for ―digital signature‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
3. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for clause (e) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
4. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for ―and Assistant Controllers‖ (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
5. Clause (g) omitted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
6. Ins. by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
7. Clauses (r), (s) and (t) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

33

(v) any other power of a civil court required to be prescribed under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of
section 58; and
1

[(w) the powers and functions of the Chairperson of the
section 52A;

2

[Appellate Tribunal] under

(x) the information, duration, manner and form of such information to be retained and preserved
under section 67C;
(y) the procedures and safeguards for interception, monitoring or decryption under sub-section (2)
of section 69;
(z) the procedures and safeguards for blocking for access by the public under sub-section (3) of
section 69 A;
(za) the procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information under
sub-section (3) of section 69B;
(zb) the information security practices and procedures for protected system under section 70;
(zc) manner of performing functions and duties of the agency under sub-section (3) of
section 70A;
(zd) the officers and employees under sub-section (2) of section 70B;
(ze) salaries and allowances and terms and conditions of service of the Director General and other
officers and employees under sub-section (3) of section 70B;
(zf) the manner in which the functions and duties of agency shall be performed under
sub-section (5) of section 70B;
(zg) the guidelines to be observed by the intermediaries under sub-section (2) of section 79;
(zh) the modes or methods for encryption under section 84A.]
(3) 3[Every notification made by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 70A and
every rule made by it] shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in 4*** the rule or both
Houses agree that 4*** the rule should not be made, 4*** the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification or
rule.
88. Constitution of Advisory Committee.–(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be
after the commencement of this Act, constitute a Committee called the Cyber Regulations Advisory
Committee.
(2) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of
other official and non-official members representing the interests principally affected or having special
knowledge of the subject-matter as the Central Government may deem fit.
(3) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall advise–
(a) the Central Government either generally as regards any rules or for any other purpose
connected with this Act;
(b) the Controller in framing the regulations under this Act.
(4) There shall be paid to the non-official members of such Committee such travelling and other
allowances as the Central Government may fix.

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 46, for clause (w) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for ―Cyber Appellate Tribunal‖(w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 46, for certain words, brackets, letter and figures (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
4. The words ―the notification or‖ omitted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

34

89. Power of Controller to make regulations.–(1) The Controller may, after consultation with the
Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee and with the previous approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–
(a) the particulars relating to maintenance of data base containing the disclosure record of every
Certifying Authority under clause 1[(n)] of section 18;
(b) the conditions and restrictions subject to which the Controller may recognise any foreign
Certifying Authority under sub-section (1) of section 19;
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which a licence may be granted under clause (c) of
sub-section (3) of section 21;
(d) other standards to be observed by a Certifying Authority under clause (d) of section 30;
(e) the manner in which the Certifying Authority shall disclose the matters specified in
sub-section (1) of section 34;
(f) the particulars of statement which shall accompany an application under sub-section (3) of
section 35.
(g) the manner by which the subscriber shall communicate the compromise of private key to the
Certifying Authority under sub-section (2) of section 42.
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that regulation.
90. Power of State Government to make rules.–(1) The State Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–
(a) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment shall be effected under
sub-section (1) of section 6;
(b) for matters specified in sub-section (2) of section 6;
2

*

*

*

*

*

(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
91. [Amendment of Act 45 of 1860.] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008
(10 of 2009), s. 48 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
92. [Amendment of Act 1 of 1872.] Omitted by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
93. [Amendment of Act 18 of 1891.] Omitted by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
94. [Amendment of Act 2 of 1934.] Omitted by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

1. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E), for ―(m)‖ (w.e.f. 19-9-2002).
2. Clause (c) omitted by Act 10 of 2009, s. 47 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

35

1

[THE FIRST SCHEDULE

[See sub-section (4) of section 1]
DOCUMENTS OR TRANSACTIONS TO WHICH THE ACT SHALL NOT APPLY
Sl. No.

Description of documents or transactions

1.

A negotiable instrument (other than a cheque) as defined in section 13 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881).

2.

A power-of-attorney as defined in section 1A of the Powers-of-Attorney Act, 1882 (7 of 1882).

3.

A trust as defined in section 3 of the Indian Trust Act, 1882 (2 of 1882).

4.

A will as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925),
including any other testamentary disposition by whatever name called.

5.

Any contract for the sale or conveyance of immovable property or any interest in such
property.

______________
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sub-section (1) of section 3A]
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE OR ELECTRONIC AUTHENTICATION TECHNIQUE AND PROCEDURE
Sl. No.
(1)

Description

Procedure

(2)

(3)

.]
________________
[THE THIRD SCHEDULE.] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008
(10 of 2009), s. 50 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.] Omitted by s. 50, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 49, for the First Schedule and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

36

jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—( ,u) 04@0007@2003—23

REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23

सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-25122023-250882
xxxGIDHxxx
CG-DL-E-25122023-250882

xxxGIDExxx
vlk/kkj.k

EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1

izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lañ 55]
No. 55]

ubZ fnYyh] lkseokj] fnlEcj 25] 2023@ ikS"k 4] 1945 ¼'kd½

NEW DELHI, MONDAY, DECEMBER 25, 2023/PAUSHA 4, 1945 (SAKA)

bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA

Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.

MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 25th December, 2023/Pausha 4, 1945 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
25th December, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:—

THE BHARATIYA SAKSHYA ADHINIYAM, 2023
NO. 47 OF 2023
[25th December, 2023.]

An Act to consolidate and to provide for general rules and principles of evidence
for fair trial.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
PART I
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023.
(2) It applies to all judicial proceedings in or before any Court, including Courts-martial,
but not to affidavits presented to any Court or officer, nor to proceedings before an arbitrator.

Short title,
application and
commencement.

2
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Definitions.

2. (1) In this Adhiniyam, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Court" includes all Judges and Magistrates, and all persons, except
arbitrators, legally authorised to take evidence;
(b) "conclusive proof" means when one fact is declared by this Adhiniyam to
be conclusive proof of another, the Court shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the
other as proved, and shall not allow evidence to be given for the purpose of disproving
it;
(c) "disproved" in relation to a fact, means when, after considering the matters
before it, the Court either believes that it does not exist, or considers its non-existence
so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case,
to act upon the supposition that it does not exist;
(d) "document" means any matter expressed or described or otherwise recorded
upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks or any other means or by
more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used, for the
purpose of recording that matter and includes electronic and digital records.
Illustrations.
(i) A writing is a document.
(ii) Words printed, lithographed or photographed are documents.
(iii) A map or plan is a document.
(iv) An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document.
(v) A caricature is a document.
(vi) An electronic record on emails, server logs, documents on computers, laptop
or smartphone, messages, websites, locational evidence and voice mail messages
stored on digital devices are documents;
(e) "evidence" means and includes—
(i) all statements including statements given electronically which the
Court permits or requires to be made before it by witnesses in relation to matters
of fact under inquiry and such statements are called oral evidence;
(ii) all documents including electronic or digital records produced for the
inspection of the Court and such documents are called documentary evidence;
(f) "fact" means and includes—
(i) any thing, state of things, or relation of things, capable of being
perceived by the senses;
(ii) any mental condition of which any person is conscious.
Illustrations.
(i) That there are certain objects arranged in a certain order in a certain place, is
a fact.
(ii) That a person heard or saw something, is a fact.
(iii) That a person said certain words, is a fact.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
3
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(iv) That a person holds a certain opinion, has a certain intention, acts in good
faith, or fraudulently, or uses a particular word in a particular sense, or is or was at a
specified time conscious of a particular sensation, is a fact;
(g) "facts in issue" means and includes any fact from which, either by itself or
in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature or extent of any
right, liability or disability, asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily
follows.
Explanation.—Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the time being
in force relating to civil procedure, any Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be
asserted or denied in the answer to such issue is a fact in issue.
Illustrations.
A is accused of the murder of B. At his trial, the following facts may be in issue:—
(i)

That A caused B's death.

(ii) That A intended to cause B's death.
(iii) That A had received grave and sudden provocation from B.
(iv) That A, at the time of doing the act which caused B's death, was, by reason
of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing its nature;
(h) "may presume".—Whenever it is provided by this Adhiniyam that the Court
may presume a fact, it may either regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved or may call for proof of it;
(i) "not proved".—A fact is said to be not proved when it is neither proved nor
disproved;
(j) "proved".—A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters
before it, the Court either believes it to exist, or considers its existence so probable
that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon
the supposition that it exists;
(k) "relevant".—A fact is said to be relevant to another when it is connected
with the other in any of the ways referred to in the provisions of this Adhiniyam
relating to the relevancy of facts;
(l) "shall presume".—Whenever it is directed by this Adhiniyam that the
Court shall presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved.
21 of 2000.

(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Information
Technology Act, 2000, the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall have the same meanings as assigned to them in the said Act and
Sanhitas.

PART II
CHAPTER II
RELEVANCY OF FACTS
3. Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence Evidence may
of every fact in issue and of such other facts as are hereinafter declared to be relevant, and be given of
facts in issue
of no others.
and relevant

Explanation.—This section shall not enable any person to give evidence of a fact facts.
which he is disentitled to prove by any provision of the law for the time being in force
relating to civil procedure.

4
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

Illustrations.
(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club with the intention of
causing his death.
At A's trial the following facts are in issue:—
A's beating B with the club;
A's causing B's death by such beating;
A's intention to cause B's death.
(b) A suitor does not bring with him, and have in readiness for production at the first
hearing of the case, a bond on which he relies. This section does not enable him to produce
the bond or prove its contents at a subsequent stage of the proceedings, otherwise than in
accordance with the conditions prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Closely connected facts
Relevancy of
facts forming
part of same
transaction.

4. Facts which, though not in issue, are so connected with a fact in issue or a
relevant fact as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred at
the same time and place or at different times and places.
Illustrations.
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was said or done by A
or B or the bystanders at the beating, or so shortly before or after it as to form part of the
transaction, is a relevant fact.
(b) A is accused of waging war against the Government of India by taking part in an
armed insurrection in which property is destroyed, troops are attacked and jails are broken
open. The occurrence of these facts is relevant, as forming part of the general transaction,
though A may not have been present at all of them.
(c) A sues B for a libel contained in a letter forming part of a correspondence. Letters
between the parties relating to the subject out of which the libel arose, and forming part of
the correspondence in which it is contained, are relevant facts, though they do not contain
the libel itself.
(d) The question is, whether certain goods ordered from B were delivered to A. The
goods were delivered to several intermediate persons successively. Each delivery is a
relevant fact.

Facts which are
occasion, cause
or effect of
facts in issue or
relevant facts.

5. Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect, immediate or otherwise, of relevant
facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute the state of things under which they happened,
or which afforded an opportunity for their occurrence or transaction, are relevant.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A robbed B. The facts that, shortly before the robbery,
B went to a fair with money in his possession, and that he showed it, or mentioned the fact
that he had it, to third persons, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A murdered B. Marks on the ground, produced by a
struggle at or near the place where the murder was committed, are relevant facts.
(c) The question is, whether A poisoned B. The state of B's health before the symptoms
ascribed to poison, and habits of B, known to A, which afforded an opportunity for the
administration of poison, are relevant facts.

Motive,
preparation
and previous
or subsequent
conduct.

6. (1) Any fact is relevant which shows or constitutes a motive or preparation for any
fact in issue or relevant fact.

5 of 1908.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
5
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(2) The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding,
in reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant
thereto, and the conduct of any person, an offence against whom is the subject of any
proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or
relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.
Explanation 1.—The word "conduct" in this section does not include statements,
unless those statements accompany and explain acts other than statements; but this
explanation is not to affect the relevancy of statements under any other section of this
Adhiniyam.
Explanation 2.—When the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement made to
him or in his presence and hearing, which affects such conduct, is relevant.
Illustrations.
(a) A is tried for the murder of B. The facts that A murdered C, that B knew that A had
murdered C, and that B had tried to extort money from A by threatening to make his knowledge
public, are relevant.
(b) A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money. B denies the making of the
bond. The fact that, at the time when the bond was alleged to be made, B required money for
a particular purpose, is relevant.
(c) A is tried for the murder of B by poison. The fact that, before the death of B, A
procured poison similar to that which was administered to B, is relevant.
(d) The question is, whether a certain document is the will of A. The facts that, not
long before, the date of the alleged will, A made inquiry into matters to which the provisions
of the alleged will relate; that he consulted advocates in reference to making the will, and
that he caused drafts of other wills to be prepared, of which he did not approve, are relevant.
(e) A is accused of a crime. The facts that, either before, or at the time of, or after the
alleged crime, A provided evidence which would tend to give to the facts of the case an
appearance favourable to himself, or that he destroyed or concealed evidence, or prevented
the presence or procured the absence of persons who might have been witnesses, or
suborned persons to give false evidence respecting it, are relevant.
(f) The question is, whether A robbed B. The facts that, after B was robbed, C said in
A's presence—"the police are coming to look for the person who robbed B", and that
immediately afterwards A ran away, are relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A owes B ten thousand rupees. The facts that A asked
C to lend him money, and that D said to C in A's presence and hearing—"I advise you not
to trust A, for he owes B ten thousand rupees", and that A went away without making any
answer, are relevant facts.
(h) The question is, whether A committed a crime. The fact that A absconded, after
receiving a letter, warning A that inquiry was being made for the criminal, and the contents
of the letter, are relevant.
(i) A is accused of a crime. The facts that, after the commission of the alleged crime,
A absconded, or was in possession of property or the proceeds of property acquired by the
crime, or attempted to conceal things which were or might have been used in committing it,
are relevant.
(j) The question is, whether A was raped. The fact that, shortly after the alleged rape,
A made a complaint relating to the crime, the circumstances under which, and the terms in
which, the complaint was made, are relevant. The fact that, without making a complaint, A
said that A had been raped is not relevant as conduct under this section, though it may be
relevant as a dying declaration under clause (a) of section 26, or as corroborative evidence
under section 160.

6
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(k) The question is, whether A was robbed. The fact that, soon after the alleged
robbery, A made a complaint relating to the offence, the circumstances under which, and the
terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant. The fact that A said he had been
robbed, without making any complaint, is not relevant, as conduct under this section,
though it may be relevant as a dying declaration under clause (a) of section 26, or as
corroborative evidence under section 160.
Facts
necessary to
explain or
introduce fact
in issue or
relevant facts.

7. Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which
support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or a relevant fact, or which
establish the identity of anything, or person whose identity, is relevant, or fix the time or
place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of
parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary
for that purpose.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether a given document is the will of A. The state of A's
property and of his family at the date of the alleged will may be relevant facts.
(b) A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct to A; B affirms that the matter
alleged to be libellous is true. The position and relations of the parties at the time when the
libel was published may be relevant facts as introductory to the facts in issue. The particulars
of a dispute between A and B about a matter unconnected with the alleged libel are irrelevant,
though the fact that there was a dispute may be relevant if it affected the relations between
A and B.
(c) A is accused of a crime. The fact that, soon after the commission of the crime, A
absconded from his house, is relevant under section 6, as conduct subsequent to and
affected by facts in issue. The fact that, at the time when he left home, A had sudden and
urgent business at the place to which he went, is relevant, as tending to explain the fact that
he left home suddenly. The details of the business on which he left are not relevant, except
in so far as they are necessary to show that the business was sudden and urgent.
(d) A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of service made by him with A. C, on
leaving A's service, says to A—"I am leaving you because B has made me a better offer".
This statement is a relevant fact as explanatory of C's conduct, which is relevant as a fact in
issue.
(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen property to B, who is seen to give it
to A's wife. B says as he delivers it—"A says you are to hide this". B's statement is relevant
as explanatory of a fact which is part of the transaction.
(f) A is tried for a riot and is proved to have marched at the head of a mob. The cries of
the mob are relevant as explanatory of the nature of the transaction.

Things said or
done by
conspirator in
reference to
common
design.

8. Where there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons have
conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, anything said, done or
written by any one of such persons in reference to their common intention, after the time
when such intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as against
each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving the
existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any such person was a party
to it.
Illustration.
Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has joined in a conspiracy to wage war
against the State.
The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected
money in Kolkata for a like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Mumbai,
E published writings advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi to

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
7
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

G at Singapore the money which C had collected at Kolkata, and the contents of a letter
written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant, both to prove the
existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A's complicity in it, although he may have been
ignorant of all of them, and although the persons by whom they were done were strangers
to him, and although they may have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he
left it.
9. Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant—
(1) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact;
(2) if by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the existence or
non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.

When facts
not otherwise
relevant
become
relevant.

Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A committed a crime at Chennai on a certain day.
The fact that, on that day, A was at Ladakh is relevant. The fact that, near the time
when the crime was committed, A was at a distance from the place where it was
committed, which would render it highly improbable, though not impossible, that he
committed it, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A committed a crime. The circumstances are such
that the crime must have been committed either by A, B, C or D. Every fact which
shows that the crime could have been committed by no one else, and that it was not
committed by either B, C or D, is relevant.
10. In suits in which damages are claimed, any fact which will enable the Court to Facts tending
to enable Court
determine the amount of damages which ought to be awarded, is relevant.

to determine
amount
are
relevant in suits
for damages.

11. Where the question is as to the existence of any right or custom, the following Facts relevant
when right or
facts are relevant—
custom is in

(a) any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created, question.
claimed, modified, recognised, asserted or denied, or which was inconsistent with its
existence;
(b) particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed, recognised
or exercised, or in which its exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
Illustration.
The question is, whether A has a right to a fishery. A deed conferring the fishery on
A's ancestors, a mortgage of the fishery by A's father, a subsequent grant of the fishery by
A's father, irreconcilable with the mortgage, particular instances in which A's father exercised
the right, or in which the exercise of the right was stopped by A's neighbours, are relevant
facts.
12. Facts showing the existence of any state of mind, such as intention, knowledge,
good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will or goodwill towards any particular person, or
showing the existence of any state of body or bodily feeling, are relevant, when the existence
of any such state of mind or body or bodily feeling is in issue or relevant.
Explanation 1.—A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant state of mind
must show that the state of mind exists, not generally, but in reference to the particular
matter in question.
Explanation 2.—But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an offence, the
previous commission by the accused of an offence is relevant within the meaning of this
section, the previous conviction of such person shall also be a relevant fact.

Facts showing
existence of
state of mind,
or of body or
bodily feeling.

8
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

Illustrations.
(a) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. It is proved that
he was in possession of a particular stolen article. The fact that, at the same time, he was in
possession of many other stolen articles is relevant, as tending to show that he knew each
and all of the articles of which he was in possession to be stolen.
(b) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to another person a counterfeit currency
which, at the time when he delivered it, he knew to be counterfeit. The fact that, at the time
of its delivery, A was possessed of a number of other pieces of counterfeit currency is
relevant. The fact that A had been previously convicted of delivering to another person as
genuine a counterfeit currency knowing it to be counterfeit is relevant.
(c) A sues B for damage done by a dog of B's, which B knew to be ferocious. The fact
that the dog had previously bitten X, Y and Z, and that they had made complaints to B, are
relevant.
(d) The question is, whether A, the acceptor of a bill of exchange, knew that the name
of the payee was fictitious. The fact that A had accepted other bills drawn in the same
manner before they could have been transmitted to him by the payee if the payee had been
a real person, is relevant, as showing that A knew that the payee was a fictitious person.
(e) A is accused of defaming B by publishing an imputation intended to harm the
reputation of B. The fact of previous publications by A respecting B, showing ill-will on the
part of A towards B is relevant, as proving A's intention to harm B's reputation by the
particular publication in question. The facts that there was no previous quarrel between A
and B, and that A repeated the matter complained of as he heard it, are relevant, as showing
that A did not intend to harm the reputation of B.
(f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B that C was solvent, whereby B,
being induced to trust C, who was insolvent, suffered loss. The fact that, at the time when
A represented C to be solvent, C was supposed to be solvent by his neighbours and by
persons dealing with him, is relevant, as showing that A made the representation in good
faith.
(g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B, upon a house of which A is owner,
by the order of C, a contractor. A's defence is that B's contract was with C. The fact that A
paid C for the work in question is relevant, as proving that A did, in good faith, make over to
C the management of the work in question, so that C was in a position to contract with B on
C's own account, and not as agent for A.
(h) A is accused of the dishonest misappropriation of property which he had found,
and the question is whether, when he appropriated it, he believed in good faith that the real
owner could not be found. The fact that public notice of the loss of the property had been
given in the place where A was, is relevant, as showing that A did not in good faith believe
that the real owner of the property could not be found. The fact that A knew, or had reason
to believe, that the notice was given fraudulently by C, who had heard of the loss of the
property and wished to set up a false claim to it, is relevant, as showing that the fact that A
knew of the notice did not disprove A's good faith.
(i) A is charged with shooting at B with intent to kill him. In order to show A's intent,
the fact of A's having previously shot at B may be proved.
(j) A is charged with sending threatening letters to B. Threatening letters previously
sent by A to B may be proved, as showing the intention of the letters.
(k) The question is, whether A has been guilty of cruelty towards B, his wife.
Expressions of their feeling towards each other shortly before or after the alleged cruelty are
relevant facts.
(l) The question is, whether A's death was caused by poison. Statements made by A
during his illness as to his symptoms are relevant facts.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
9
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(m) The question is, what was the state of A's health at the time when an assurance on
his life was effected. Statements made by A as to the state of his health at or near the time in
question are relevant facts.
(n) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a car for hire not reasonably fit for
use, whereby A was injured. The fact that B's attention was drawn on other occasions to the
defect of that particular car is relevant. The fact that B was habitually negligent about the
cars which he let to hire is irrelevant.
(o) A is tried for the murder of B by intentionally shooting him dead. The fact that A on
other occasions shot at B is relevant as showing his intention to shoot B. The fact that A
was in the habit of shooting at people with intent to murder them is irrelevant.
(p) A is tried for a crime. The fact that he said something indicating an intention to
commit that particular crime is relevant. The fact that he said something indicating a general
disposition to commit crimes of that class is irrelevant.
13. When there is a question whether an act was accidental or intentional, or done Facts bearing
with a particular knowledge or intention, the fact that such act formed part of a series of on question
similar occurrences, in each of which the person doing the act was concerned, is relevant. whether act

was accidental
or intentional.

Illustrations.
(a) A is accused of burning down his house in order to obtain money for which it is
insured. The facts that A lived in several houses successively each of which he insured, in
each of which a fire occurred, and after each of which fires A received payment from a
different insurance company, are relevant, as tending to show that the fires were not
accidental.
(b) A is employed to receive money from the debtors of B. It is A's duty to make entries
in a book showing the amounts received by him. He makes an entry showing that on a
particular occasion he received less than he really did receive. The question is, whether this
false entry was accidental or intentional. The facts that other entries made by A in the same
book are false, and that the false entry is in each case in favour of A, are relevant.
(c) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B a counterfeit currency. The question
is, whether the delivery of the currency was accidental. The facts that, soon before or soon
after the delivery to B, A delivered counterfeit currency to C, D and E are relevant, as
showing that the delivery to B was not accidental.
14. When there is a question whether a particular act was done, the existence of any Existence of
course of business, according to which it naturally would have been done, is a relevant fact. course of

business when
relevant.

Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether a particular letter was dispatched. The facts that it was
the ordinary course of business for all letters put in a certain place to be carried to the post,
and that particular letter was put in that place are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether a particular letter reached A. The facts that it was posted
in due course, and was not returned through the Return Letter Office, are relevant.
Admissions
15. An admission is a statement, oral or documentary or contained in electronic form, Admission
which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is made by defined.
any of the persons, and under the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned.
16. (1) Statements made by a party to the proceeding, or by an agent to any such
party, whom the Court regards, under the circumstances of the case, as expressly or impliedly
authorised by him to make them, are admissions.

Admission by
party to
proceeding or
his agent.

10
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(2) Statements made by—
(i) parties to suits suing or sued in a representative character, are not admissions,
unless they were made while the party making them held that character; or
(ii) (a) persons who have any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject
matter of the proceeding, and who make the statement in their character of persons so
interested; or
(b) persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the
subject matter of the suit,
are admissions, if they are made during the continuance of the interest of the persons
making the statements.
Admissions by
persons whose
position must
be proved as
against party
to suit.

17. Statements made by persons whose position or liability, it is necessary to prove
as against any party to the suit, are admissions, if such statements would be relevant as
against such persons in relation to such position or liability in a suit brought by or against
them, and if they are made whilst the person making them occupies such position or is
subject to such liability.
Illustration.
A undertakes to collect rents for B. B sues A for not collecting rent due from C to B. A
denies that rent was due from C to B. A statement by C that he owed B rent is an admission,
and is a relevant fact as against A, if A denies that C did owe rent to B.

Admissions by
persons
expressly
referred to by
party to suit.

18. Statements made by persons to whom a party to the suit has expressly referred
for information in reference to a matter in dispute are admissions.
Illustration.
The question is, whether a horse sold by A to B is sound.
A says to B—"Go and ask C, C knows all about it". C's statement is an admission.

Proof of
admissions
against persons
making them,
and by or on
their behalf.

19. Admissions are relevant and may be proved as against the person who makes
them, or his representative in interest; but they cannot be proved by or on behalf of the
person who makes them or by his representative in interest, except in the following cases,
namely:—
(1) an admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when
it is of such a nature that, if the person making it were dead, it would be relevant as
between third persons under section 26;
(2) an admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when
it consists of a statement of the existence of any state of mind or body, relevant or in
issue, made at or about the time when such state of mind or body existed, and is
accompanied by conduct rendering its falsehood improbable;
(3) an admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, if it is
relevant otherwise than as an admission.
Illustrations.
(a) The question between A and B is, whether a certain deed is or is not forged. A
affirms that it is genuine, B that it is forged. A may prove a statement by B that the deed is
genuine, and B may prove a statement by A that deed is forged; but A cannot prove a
statement by himself that the deed is genuine, nor can B prove a statement by himself that
the deed is forged.
(b) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away. Evidence is given to show
that the ship was taken out of her proper course. A produces a book kept by him in the
ordinary course of his business showing observations alleged to have been taken by him

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
11
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

from day to day, and indicating that the ship was not taken out of her proper course. A may
prove these statements, because they would be admissible between third parties, if he were
dead, under clause (b) of section 26.
(c) A is accused of a crime committed by him at Kolkata. He produces a letter written
by himself and dated at Chennai on that day, and bearing the Chennai post-mark of that day.
The statement in the date of the letter is admissible, because, if A were dead, it would be
admissible under clause (b) of section 26.
(d) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. He offers to
prove that he refused to sell them below their value. A may prove these statements, though
they are admissions, because they are explanatory of conduct influenced by facts in issue.
(e) A is accused of fraudulently having in his possession counterfeit currency which
he knew to be counterfeit. He offers to prove that he asked a skilful person to examine the
currency as he doubted whether it was counterfeit or not, and that person did examine it
and told him it was genuine. A may prove these facts.
20. Oral admissions as to the contents of a document are not relevant, unless and
until the party proposing to prove them shows that he is entitled to give secondary evidence
of the contents of such document under the rules hereinafter contained, or unless the
genuineness of a document produced is in question.

When oral
admissions as
to contents of
documents are
relevant.

21. In civil cases no admission is relevant, if it is made either upon an express condition Admissions in
that evidence of it is not to be given, or under circumstances from which the Court can infer civil cases
when relevant.
that the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not be given.
Explanation.—Nothing in this section shall be taken to exempt any advocate from
giving evidence of any matter of which he may be compelled to give evidence under
sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 132.
22. A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a criminal proceeding, if
the making of the confession appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement,
threat, coercion or promise having reference to the charge against the accused person,
proceeding from a person in authority and sufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the
accused person grounds which would appear to him reasonable for supposing that by
making it he would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in reference to
the proceedings against him:

Confession
caused by
inducement,
threat,
coercion or
promise, when
irrelevant in
criminal
proceeding.

Provided that if the confession is made after the impression caused by any such
inducement, threat, coercion or promise has, in the opinion of the Court, been fully removed,
it is relevant:
Provided further that if such a confession is otherwise relevant, it does not become
irrelevant merely because it was made under a promise of secrecy, or in consequence of a
deception practised on the accused person for the purpose of obtaining it, or when he was
drunk, or because it was made in answer to questions which he need not have answered,
whatever may have been the form of those questions, or because he was not warned that he
was not bound to make such confession, and that evidence of it might be given against him.
23. (1) No confession made to a police officer shall be proved as against a person Confession to
police officer.
accused of any offence.
(2) No confession made by any person while he is in the custody of a police officer,
unless it is made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate shall be proved against him:

12
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

Provided that when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information
received from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much
of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the
fact discovered, may be proved.
Consideration
of proved
confession
affecting
person making
it and others
jointly under
trial for same
offence.

24. When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the same offence, and a
confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such persons
is proved, the Court may take into consideration such confession as against such other
person as well as against the person who makes such confession.
Explanation I.—"Offence", as used in this section, includes the abetment of, or
attempt to commit, the offence.
Explanation II.—A trial of more persons than one held in the absence of the accused
who has absconded or who fails to comply with a proclamation issued under section 84 of
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 shall be deemed to be a joint trial for the
purpose of this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It is proved that A said—"B and I
murdered C". The Court may consider the effect of this confession as against B.
(b) A is on his trial for the murder of C. There is evidence to show that C was murdered
by A and B, and that B said—"A and I murdered C". This statement may not be taken into
consideration by the Court against A, as B is not being jointly tried.

Admissions
not conclusive
proof, but
may estop.

25. Admissions are not conclusive proof of the matters admitted but they may operate
as estoppels under the provisions hereinafter contained.

Cases in which
statement of
relevant fact
by person who
is dead or
cannot be
found, etc., is
relevant.

26. Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or
who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance
cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense which under the circumstances
of the case appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the following
cases, namely:—

Statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses

(a) when the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as
to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in
which the cause of that person's death comes into question. Such statements are
relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the time when they
were made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be the nature of the
proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into question;
(b) when the statement was made by such person in the ordinary course of
business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum made by him
in books kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of professional
duty; or of an acknowledgement written or signed by him of the receipt of money,
goods, securities or property of any kind; or of a document used in commerce written
or signed by him; or of the date of a letter or other document usually dated, written or
signed by him;
(c) when the statement is against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the
person making it, or when, if true, it would expose him or would have exposed him to
a criminal prosecution or to a suit for damages;
(d) when the statement gives the opinion of any such person, as to the existence
of any public right or custom or matter of public or general interest, of the existence of
which, if it existed, he would have been likely to be aware, and when such statement
was made before any controversy as to such right, custom or matter had arisen;

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
13
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(e) when the statement relates to the existence of any relationship by blood,
marriage or adoption between persons as to whose relationship by blood, marriage or
adoption the person making the statement had special means of knowledge, and
when the statement was made before the question in dispute was raised;
(f) when the statement relates to the existence of any relationship by blood,
marriage or adoption between persons deceased, and is made in any will or deed
relating to the affairs of the family to which any such deceased person belonged, or in
any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on which
such statements are usually made, and when such statement was made before the
question in dispute was raised;
(g) when the statement is contained in any deed, will or other document which
relates to any such transaction as is specified in clause (a) of section 11;
(h) when the statement was made by a number of persons, and expressed
feelings or impressions on their part relevant to the matter in question.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A was murdered by B; or A dies of injuries received in a
transaction in the course of which she was raped. The question is whether she was raped
by B; or the question is, whether A was killed by B under such circumstances that a suit
would lie against B by A's widow. Statements made by A as to the cause of his or her death,
referring respectively to the murder, the rape and the actionable wrong under consideration,
are relevant facts.
(b) The question is as to the date of A's birth. An entry in the diary of a deceased
surgeon regularly kept in the course of business, stating that, on a given day he attended
A's mother and delivered her of a son, is a relevant fact.
(c) The question is, whether A was in Nagpur on a given day. A statement in the diary
of a deceased solicitor, regularly kept in the course of business, that on a given day the
solicitor attended A at a place mentioned, in Nagpur, for the purpose of conferring with him
upon specified business, is a relevant fact.
(d) The question is, whether a ship sailed from Mumbai harbour on a given day. A
letter written by a deceased member of a merchant's firm by which she was chartered to their
correspondents in Chennai, to whom the cargo was consigned, stating that the ship sailed
on a given day from Mumbai port, is a relevant fact.
(e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for certain land. A letter from A's
deceased agent to A, saying that he had received the rent on A's account and held it at A's
orders is a relevant fact.
(f) The question is, whether A and B were legally married. The statement of a deceased
clergyman that he married them under such circumstances that the celebration would be a
crime is relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be found, wrote a letter on a
certain day. The fact that a letter written by him is dated on that day is relevant.
(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship. A protest made by the
captain, whose attendance cannot be procured, is a relevant fact.
(i) The question is, whether a given road is a public way. A statement by A, a deceased
headman of the village, that the road was public, is a relevant fact.
(j) The question is, what was the price of grain on a certain day in a particular market.
A statement of the price, made by a deceased business person in the ordinary course of his
business, is a relevant fact.

14
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(k) The question is, whether A, who is dead, was the father of B. A statement by A that
B was his son, is a relevant fact.
(l) The question is, what was the date of the birth of A. A letter from A's deceased
father to a friend, announcing the birth of A on a given day, is a relevant fact.
(m) The question is, whether, and when, A and B were married. An entry in a
memorandum book by C, the deceased father of B, of his daughter's marriage with A on a
given date, is a relevant fact.
(n) A sues B for a libel expressed in a painted caricature exposed in a shop window.
The question is as to the similarity of the caricature and its libellous character. The remarks
of a crowd of spectators on these points may be proved.
Relevancy of
certain
evidence for
proving, in
subsequent
proceeding,
truth of facts
therein stated.

27. Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person
authorised by law to take it, is relevant for the purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial
proceeding, or in a later stage of the same judicial proceeding, the truth of the facts which
it states, when the witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving evidence,
or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or if his presence cannot be obtained without
an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the Court
considers unreasonable:
Provided that the proceeding was between the same parties or their representatives in
interest; that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and opportunity to
cross-examine and the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first as in the
second proceeding.
Explanation.—A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a proceeding between
the prosecutor and the accused within the meaning of this section.
Statements made under special circumstances

Entries in
books of
account when
relevant.

28. Entries in the books of account, including those maintained in an electronic form,
regularly kept in the course of business are relevant whenever they refer to a matter into
which the Court has to inquire, but such statements shall not alone be sufficient evidence
to charge any person with liability.
Illustration.
A sues B for one thousand rupees, and shows entries in his account books showing
B to be indebted to him to this amount. The entries are relevant, but are not sufficient,
without other evidence, to prove the debt.

Relevancy of
entry in public
record or an
electronic
record made in
performance
of duty.

29. An entry in any public or other official book, register or record or an electronic
record, stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by a public servant in the discharge
of his official duty, or by any other person in performance of a duty specially enjoined by
the law of the country in which such book, register or record or an electronic record, is kept,
is itself a relevant fact.

Relevancy of
statements in
maps, charts
and plans.

30. Statements of facts in issue or relevant facts, made in published maps or charts
generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans made under the authority of the Central
Government or any State Government, as to matters usually represented or stated in such
maps, charts or plans, are themselves relevant facts.

Relevancy of
statement as
to fact of
public nature
contained in
certain Acts or
notifications.

31. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any fact of a public
nature, any statement of it, made in a recital contained in any Central Act or State Act or in
a Central Government or State Government notification appearing in the respective Official
Gazette or in any printed paper or in electronic or digital form purporting to be such Gazette,
is a relevant fact.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
15
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

32. When the Court has to form an opinion as to a law of any country, any statement
of such law contained in a book purporting to be printed or published including in electronic
or digital form under the authority of the Government of such country and to contain any
such law, and any report of a ruling of the Courts of such country contained in a book
including in electronic or digital form purporting to be a report of such rulings, is relevant.

Relevancy of
statements as
to any law
contained in
law books
including
electronic or
digital form.

How much of a statement is to be proved
33. When any statement of which evidence is given forms part of a longer statement,
or of a conversation or part of an isolated document, or is contained in a document which
forms part of a book, or is contained in part of electronic record or of a connected series of
letters or papers, evidence shall be given of so much and no more of the statement,
conversation, document, electronic record, book or series of letters or papers as the Court
considers necessary in that particular case to the full understanding of the nature and effect
of the statement, and of the circumstances under which it was made.

What evidence
to be given
when statement
forms part of a
conversation,
document,
electronic
record, book or
series of letters
or papers.

Judgments of Courts when relevant
34. The existence of any judgment, order or decree which by law prevents any Court Previous
from taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, is a relevant fact when the question is judgments
relevant to bar
whether such Court ought to take cognizance of such suit or to hold such trial.
a second suit
or trial.

35. (1) A final judgment, order or decree of a competent Court or Tribunal, in the
exercise of probate, matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction, which confers upon
or takes away from any person any legal character, or which declares any person to be
entitled to any such character, or to be entitled to any specific thing, not as against any
specified person but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of any such legal character,
or the title of any such person to any such thing, is relevant.

Relevancy of
certain
judgments in
probate, etc.,
jurisdiction.

(2) Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof that—
(i) any legal character, which it confers accrued at the time when such judgment,
order or decree came into operation;
(ii) any legal character, to which it declares any such person to be entitled,
accrued to that person at the time when such judgment, order or decree declares it to
have accrued to that person;
(iii) any legal character which it takes away from any such person ceased at the
time from which such judgment, order or decree declared that it had ceased or should
cease; and
(iv) anything to which it declares any person to be so entitled was the property
of that person at the time from which such judgment, order or decree declares that it
had been or should be his property.
36. Judgments, orders or decrees other than those mentioned in section 35 are relevant
if they relate to matters of a public nature relevant to the enquiry; but such judgments,
orders or decrees are not conclusive proof of that which they state.

Illustration.
A sues B for trespass on his land. B alleges the existence of a public right of way over
the land, which A denies. The existence of a decree in favour of the defendant, in a suit by
A against C for a trespass on the same land, in which C alleged the existence of the same
right of way, is relevant, but it is not conclusive proof that the right of way exists.

Relevancy and
effect of
judgments,
orders or
decrees, other
than those
mentioned in
section 35.

16
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
Judgments,
etc., other
than those
mentioned in
sections 34, 35
and 36 when
relevant.

37. Judgments or orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in sections 34, 35
and 36, are irrelevant, unless the existence of such judgment, order or decree is a fact in
issue, or is relevant under some other provision of this Adhiniyam.
Illustrations.
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reflects upon each of them. C in each
case says that the matter alleged to be libellous is true, and the circumstances are such that
it is probably true in each case, or in neither. A obtains a decree against C for damages on the
ground that C failed to make out his justification. The fact is irrelevant as between B and C.
(b) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him. B is convicted. A afterwards sues C
for the cow, which B had sold to him before his conviction. As between A and C, the
judgment against B is irrelevant.
(c) A has obtained a decree for the possession of land against B. C, B's son, murders
A in consequence. The existence of the judgment is relevant, as showing motive for a crime.
(d) A is charged with theft and with having been previously convicted of theft. The
previous conviction is relevant as a fact in issue.
(e) A is tried for the murder of B. The fact that B prosecuted A for libel and that A was
convicted and sentenced is relevant under section 6 as showing the motive for the fact in
issue.

Fraud or
collusion in
obtaining
judgment, or
incompetency
of Court, may
be proved.

38. Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order or
decree which is relevant under section 34, 35 or 36, and which has been proved by the
adverse party, was delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it, or was obtained by
fraud or collusion.

Opinions of
experts.

39. (1) When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law or of
science or art, or any other field, or as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions, the
opinions upon that point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art, or
any other field, or in questions as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions are
relevant facts and such persons are called experts.

Opinions of third persons when relevant

Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether the death of A was caused by poison. The opinions of
experts as to the symptoms produced by the poison by which A is supposed to have died,
are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A, at the time of doing a certain act, was, by reason of
unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he was doing what
was either wrong or contrary to law. The opinions of experts upon the question whether the
symptoms exhibited by A commonly show unsoundness of mind, and whether such
unsoundness of mind usually renders persons incapable of knowing the nature of the acts
which they do, or of knowing that what they do is either wrong or contrary to law, are
relevant.
(c) The question is, whether a certain document was written by A. Another document
is produced which is proved or admitted to have been written by A. The opinions of experts

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
17
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

on the question whether the two documents were written by the same person or by different
persons, are relevant.

21 of 2000.

(2) When in a proceeding, the court has to form an opinion on any matter relating to
any information transmitted or stored in any computer resource or any other electronic or
digital form, the opinion of the Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to in section 79A of
the Information Technology Act, 2000, is a relevant fact.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, an Examiner of Electronic Evidence
shall be an expert.
40. Facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if they support or are inconsistent Facts bearing
upon opinions
with the opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
of experts.

Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a certain poison. The fact that other
persons, who were poisoned by that poison, exhibited certain symptoms which experts
affirm or deny to be the symptoms of that poison, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether an obstruction to a harbour is caused by a certain
sea-wall. The fact that other harbours similarly situated in other respects, but where there
were no such sea-walls, began to be obstructed at about the same time, is relevant.
41. (1) When the Court has to form an opinion as to the person by whom any document
was written or signed, the opinion of any person acquainted with the handwriting of the
person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it was or was not written or
signed by that person, is a relevant fact.

Opinion as to
handwriting
and signature,
when relevant.

Explanation.—A person is said to be acquainted with the handwriting of another
person when he has seen that person write, or when he has received documents purporting
to be written by that person in answer to documents written by himself or under his authority
and addressed to that person, or when, in the ordinary course of business, documents
purporting to be written by that person have been habitually submitted to him.
Illustration.
The question is, whether a given letter is in the handwriting of A, a merchant in
Itanagar. B is a merchant in Bengaluru, who has written letters addressed to A and received
letters purporting to be written by him. C, is B's clerk whose duty it was to examine and file
B's correspondence. D is B's broker, to whom B habitually submitted the letters purporting
to be written by A for the purpose of advising him thereon. The opinions of B, C and D on
the question whether the letter is in the handwriting of A are relevant, though neither B, C
nor D ever saw A write.
(2) When the Court has to form an opinion as to the electronic signature of any
person, the opinion of the Certifying Authority which has issued the Electronic Signature
Certificate is a relevant fact.
42. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any general custom Opinion as to
or right, the opinions, as to the existence of such custom or right, of persons who would be existence of
general custom
likely to know of its existence if it existed, are relevant.
or right, when

Explanation.—The expression "general custom or right" includes customs or rights relevant.
common to any considerable class of persons.
Illustration.
The right of the villagers of a particular village to use the water of a particular well is
a general right within the meaning of this section.
43. When the Court has to form an opinion as to—
(i) the usages and tenets of any body of men or family;

Opinion as to
usages, tenets,
etc., when
relevant.

18
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(ii) the constitution and governance of any religious or charitable
foundation; or
(iii) the meaning of words or terms used in particular districts or by particular
classes of people,
the opinions of persons having special means of knowledge thereon, are relevant facts.
Opinion on
relationship,
when relevant.

44. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the relationship of one person to
another, the opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of such relationship, of any
person who, as a member of the family or otherwise, has special means of knowledge on the
subject, is a relevant fact:
Provided that such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a marriage in proceedings
under the Divorce Act, 1869, or in prosecution under sections 82 and 84 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A and B were married. The fact that they were usually
received and treated by their friends as husband and wife, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A was the legitimate son of B. The fact that A was always
treated as such by members of the family, is relevant.

Grounds of
opinion, when
relevant.

45. Whenever the opinion of any living person is relevant, the grounds on which
such opinion is based are also relevant.
Illustration.
An expert may give an account of experiments performed by him for the purpose of
forming his opinion.
Character when relevant

In civil cases
character to
prove conduct
imputed,
irrelevant.

46. In civil cases the fact that the character of any person concerned is such as to
render probable or improbable any conduct imputed to him, is irrelevant, except in so far as
such character appears from facts otherwise relevant.

In criminal
cases previous
good character
relevant.

47. In criminal proceedings the fact that the person accused is of a good character, is
relevant.

Evidence of
character or
previous sexual
experience not
relevant in
certain cases.

48. In a prosecution for an offence under section 64, section 65, section 66,
section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70, section 71, section 74, section 75, section 76,
section 77 or section 78 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or for attempt to commit any
such offence, where the question of consent is in issue, evidence of the character of the
victim or of such person's previous sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant
on the issue of such consent or the quality of consent.

49. In criminal proceedings, the fact that the accused has a bad character, is irrelevant,
Previous bad
character not
unless evidence has been given that he has a good character, in which case it becomes
relevant,
relevant.
except in reply.
Explanation 1.—This section does not apply to cases in which the bad character of
any person is itself a fact in issue.
Explanation 2.—A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad character.

4 of 1869.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
19
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

50. In civil cases, the fact that the character of any person is such as to affect the Character as
affecting
amount of damages which he ought to receive, is relevant.
damages.

Explanation.—In this section and sections 46, 47 and 49, the word "character"
includes both reputation and disposition; but, except as provided in section 49, evidence
may be given only of general reputation and general disposition, and not of particular acts
by which reputation or disposition has been shown.
PART III
ON PROOF
CHAPTER III
FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
51. No fact of which the Court will take judicial notice need be proved.

Fact judicially
noticeable
need not be
proved.

52. (1) The Court shall take judicial notice of the following facts, namely:—

Facts of which
Court shall
take judicial
notice.

(a) all laws in force in the territory of India including laws having extra-territorial
operation;
(b) international treaty, agreement or convention with country or countries by
India, or decisions made by India at international associations or other bodies;
(c) the course of proceeding of the Constituent Assembly of India, of Parliament
of India and of the State Legislatures;
(d) the seals of all Courts and Tribunals;
(e) the seals of Courts of Admiralty and Maritime Jurisdiction, Notaries Public,
and all seals which any person is authorised to use by the Constitution, or by an Act
of Parliament or State Legislatures, or Regulations having the force of law in India;
(f) the accession to office, names, titles, functions, and signatures of the persons
filling for the time being any public office in any State, if the fact of their appointment
to such office is notified in any Official Gazette;
(g) the existence, title and national flag of every country or sovereign recognised
by the Government of India;
(h) the divisions of time, the geographical divisions of the world, and public
festivals, fasts and holidays notified in the Official Gazette;
(i) the territory of India;
(j) the commencement, continuance and termination of hostilities between the
Government of India and any other country or body of persons;
(k) the names of the members and officers of the Court and of their deputies and
subordinate officers and assistants, and also of all officers acting in execution of its
process, and of advocates and other persons authorised by law to appear or act
before it;
(l) the rule of the road on land or at sea.
(2) In the cases referred to in sub-section (1) and also on all matters of public history,
literature, science or art, the Court may resort for its aid to appropriate books or documents
of reference and if the Court is called upon by any person to take judicial notice of any fact,
it may refuse to do so unless and until such person produces any such book or document
as it may consider necessary to enable it to do so.

20
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
Facts admitted
need not be
proved.

53. No fact needs to be proved in any proceeding which the parties thereto or their
agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agree to admit by
any writing under their hands, or which by any rule of pleading in force at the time they are
deemed to have admitted by their pleadings:
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require the facts admitted to be proved
otherwise than by such admissions.
CHAPTER IV
OF ORAL EVIDENCE

Proof of facts
by oral
evidence.

54. All facts, except the contents of documents may be proved by oral evidence.

Oral evidence
to be direct.

55. Oral evidence shall, in all cases whatever, be direct; if it refers to,—
(i) a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he
saw it;
(ii) a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says
he heard it;
(iii) a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner,
it must be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that
manner;
(iv) an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the
evidence of the person who holds that opinion on those grounds:
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise commonly offered for
sale, and the grounds on which such opinions are held, may be proved by the production
of such treatises if the author is dead or cannot be found, or has become incapable of giving
evidence, or cannot be called as a witness without an amount of delay or expense which the
Court regards as unreasonable:
Provided further that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any
material thing other than a document, the Court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of
such material thing for its inspection.
CHAPTER V
OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

Proof of
contents of
documents.

56. The contents of documents may be proved either by primary or by secondary
evidence.

Primary
evidence.

57. Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the
Court.
Explanation 1.—Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is primary
evidence of the document.
Explanation 2.—Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart
being executed by one or some of the parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as
against the parties executing it.
Explanation 3.—Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform process,
as in the case of printing, lithography or photography, each is primary evidence of the
contents of the rest; but, where they are all copies of a common original, they are not
primary evidence of the contents of the original.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
21
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

Explanation 4.—Where an electronic or digital record is created or stored, and such
storage occurs simultaneously or sequentially in multiple files, each such file is primary
evidence.
Explanation 5.—Where an electronic or digital record is produced from proper
custody, such electronic and digital record is primary evidence unless it is disputed.
Explanation 6.—Where a video recording is simultaneously stored in electronic
form and transmitted or broadcast or transferred to another, each of the stored recordings is
primary evidence.
Explanation 7.—Where an electronic or digital record is stored in multiple storage
spaces in a computer resource, each such automated storage, including temporary files, is
primary evidence.
Illustration.
A person is shown to have been in possession of a number of placards, all printed at
one time from one original. Any one of the placards is primary evidence of the contents of
any other, but no one of them is primary evidence of the contents of the original.
58. Secondary evidence includes—
(i) certified copies given under the provisions hereinafter contained;

Secondary
evidence.

(ii) copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves
ensure the accuracy of the copy, and copies compared with such copies;
(iii) copies made from or compared with the original;
(iv) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute
them;
(v) oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has
himself seen it;
(vi) oral admissions;
(vii) written admissions;
(viii) evidence of a person who has examined a document, the original of which
consists of numerous accounts or other documents which cannot conveniently be
examined in Court, and who is skilled in the examination of such documents.
Illustrations.
(a) A photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its contents, though the
two have not been compared, if it is proved that the thing photographed was the original.
(b) A copy compared with a copy of a letter made by a copying machine is secondary
evidence of the contents of the letter, if it is shown that the copy made by the copying
machine was made from the original.
(c) A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards compared with the original, is
secondary evidence; but the copy not so compared is not secondary evidence of the
original, although the copy from which it was transcribed was compared with the original.
(d) Neither an oral account of a copy compared with the original, nor an oral account
of a photograph or machine-copy of the original, is secondary evidence of the original.
59. Documents shall be proved by primary evidence except in the cases hereinafter Proof of
documents by
mentioned.
primary
evidence.

22
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
Cases in which
secondary
evidence
relating to
documents may
be given.

60. Secondary evidence may be given of the existence, condition, or contents of a
document in the following cases, namely: —
(a) when the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power—
(i) of the person against whom the document is sought to be proved; or
(ii) of any person out of reach of, or not subject to, the process of the
Court; or
(iii) of any person legally bound to produce it,
and when, after the notice mentioned in section 64 such person does not produce it;
(b) when the existence, condition or contents of the original have been proved
to be admitted in writing by the person against whom it is proved or by his
representative in interest;
(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the party offering
evidence of its contents cannot, for any other reason not arising from his own default
or neglect, produce it in reasonable time;
(d) when the original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable;
(e) when the original is a public document within the meaning of section 74;
(f) when the original is a document of which a certified copy is permitted by this
Adhiniyam, or by any other law in force in India to be given in evidence;
(g) when the originals consist of numerous accounts or other documents which
cannot conveniently be examined in Court, and the fact to be proved is the general
result of the whole collection.
Explanation.—For the purposes of—
(i) clauses (a), (c) and (d), any secondary evidence of the contents of the
document is admissible;
(ii) clause (b), the written admission is admissible;
(iii) clause (e) or (f), a certified copy of the document, but no other kind of
secondary evidence, is admissible;
(iv) clause (g), evidence may be given as to the general result of the documents
by any person who has examined them, and who is skilled in the examination of such
document.

Electronic or
digital record.

61. Nothing in this Adhiniyam shall apply to deny the admissibility of an electronic
or digital record in the evidence on the ground that it is an electronic or digital record and
such record shall, subject to section 63, have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability
as other document.

62. The contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance with the
Special
provisions as to provisions of section 63.
evidence
relating to
electronic
record.
Admissibility
of electronic
records.

63. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Adhiniyam, any information
contained in an electronic record which is printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in
optical or magnetic media or semiconductor memory which is produced by a computer or
any communication device or otherwise stored, recorded or copied in any electronic form
(hereinafter referred to as the computer output) shall be deemed to be also a document, if
the conditions mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation to the information and

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
23
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

computer in question and shall be admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or
production of the original, as evidence or any contents of the original or of any fact stated
therein of which direct evidence would be admissible.
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of a computer output shall
be the following, namely:—
(a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the
computer or communication device during the period over which the computer or
communication device was used regularly to create, store or process information
for the purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that period by the
person having lawful control over the use of the computer or communication
device;
(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the electronic
record or of the kind from which the information so contained is derived was regularly
fed into the computer or communication device in the ordinary course of the said
activities;
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer or
communication device was operating properly or, if not, then in respect of any
period in which it was not operating properly or was out of operation during that
part of the period, was not such as to affect the electronic record or the
accuracy of its contents; and
(d) the information contained in the electronic record reproduces or is
derived from such information fed into the computer or communication device in the
ordinary course of the said activities.
(3) Where over any period, the function of creating, storing or processing information
for the purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that period as mentioned in
clause (a) of sub-section (2) was regularly performed by means of one or more computers or
communication device, whether—
(a) in standalone mode; or
(b) on a computer system; or
(c) on a computer network; or
(d) on a computer resource enabling information creation or providing information
processing and storage; or
(e) through an intermediary,
all the computers or communication devices used for that purpose during that period shall
be treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single computer or communication
device; and references in this section to a computer or communication device shall be
construed accordingly.
(4) In any proceeding where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of
this section, a certificate doing any of the following things shall be submitted along with the
electronic record at each instance where it is being submitted for admission, namely:—
(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement and describing
the manner in which it was produced;
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that
electronic record as may be appropriate for the purpose of showing that the electronic
record was produced by a computer or a communication device referred to in clauses (a)
to (e) of sub-section (3);
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in
sub-section (2) relate,
and purporting to be signed by a person in charge of the computer or communication
device or the management of the relevant activities (whichever is appropriate) and an expert
shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for the purposes of this
sub-section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and
belief of the person stating it in the certificate specified in the Schedule.

24
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(5) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer or communication
device if it is supplied thereto in any appropriate form and whether it is so supplied
directly or (with or without human intervention) by means of any appropriate
equipment;
(b) a computer output shall be taken to have been produced by a computer or
communication device whether it was produced by it directly or (with or without
human intervention) by means of any appropriate equipment or by other electronic
means as referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (3).
Rules as to
notice to
produce.

64. Secondary evidence of the contents of the documents referred to in clause (a) of
section 60, shall not be given unless the party proposing to give such secondary evidence
has previously given to the party in whose possession or power the document is, or to his
advocate or representative, such notice to produce it as is prescribed by law; and if no
notice is prescribed by law, then such notice as the Court considers reasonable under the
circumstances of the case:
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary evidence
admissible in any of the following cases, or in any other case in which the Court thinks fit
to dispense with it:—
(a) when the document to be proved is itself a notice;
(b) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse party must know that he will
be required to produce it;
(c) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party has obtained possession
of the original by fraud or force;
(d) when the adverse party or his agent has the original in Court;
(e) when the adverse party or his agent has admitted the loss of the document;
(f) when the person in possession of the document is out of reach of, or not
subject to, the process of the Court.

Proof of
signature and
handwriting of
person alleged
to have signed
or written
document
produced.

65. If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in part by
any person, the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to be
in that person's handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.

Proof as to
electronic
signature.

66. Except in the case of a secure electronic signature, if the electronic signature of
any subscriber is alleged to have been affixed to an electronic record, the fact that such
electronic signature is the electronic signature of the subscriber must be proved.

Proof of
execution of
document
required by law
to be attested.

67. If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence
until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its execution,
if there be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the Court and capable of
giving evidence:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the
execution of any document, not being a will, which has been registered in accordance with
the provisions of the Indian Registration Act, 1908, unless its execution by the person by
whom it purports to have been executed is specifically denied.

Proof where
no attesting
witness found.

68. If no such attesting witness can be found, it must be proved that the attestation
of one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the signature of the person
executing the document is in the handwriting of that person.

16 of 1908.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
25
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

69. The admission of a party to an attested document of its execution by himself
shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against him, though it be a document required by
law to be attested.

Admission of
execution by
party to
attested
document.

70. If the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the execution of the document, Proof when
attesting
its execution may be proved by other evidence.

witness denies
execution.

71. An attested document not required by law to be attested may be proved as if it Proof of
document not
was unattested.

required by law
to be attested.

72. (1) In order to ascertain whether a signature, writing or seal is that of the person
by whom it purports to have been written or made, any signature, writing, or seal admitted
or proved to the satisfaction of the Court to have been written or made by that person may
be compared with the one which is to be proved, although that signature, writing or seal has
not been produced or proved for any other purpose.

Comparison
of signature,
writing or seal
with others
admitted or
proved.

(2) The Court may direct any person present in Court to write any words or figures for
the purpose of enabling the Court to compare the words or figures so written with any
words or figures alleged to have been written by such person.
(3) This section applies also, with any necessary modifications, to finger impressions.
73. In order to ascertain whether a digital signature is that of the person by whom it Proof as to
verification of
purports to have been affixed, the Court may direct—
digital

(a) that person or the Controller or the Certifying Authority to produce the signature.
Digital Signature Certificate;
(b) any other person to apply the public key listed in the Digital Signature
Certificate and verify the digital signature purported to have been affixed by that
person.
Public documents
74. (1) The following documents are public documents:—
(a) documents forming the acts, or records of the acts—

Public and
private
documents.

(i) of the sovereign authority;
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals; and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial and executive of India or of a
foreign country;
(b) public records kept in any State or Union territory of private documents.
(2) All other documents except the documents referred to in sub-section (1) are
private.
75. Every public officer having the custody of a public document, which any person
has a right to inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of it on payment of the legal
fees therefor, together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that it is a true copy
of such document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such certificate shall be dated and
subscribed by such officer with his name and his official title, and shall be sealed, whenever
such officer is authorised by law to make use of a seal; and such copies so certified shall be
called certified copies.

Certified
copies of
public
documents.

26
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

Explanation.—Any officer who, by the ordinary course of official duty, is authorised
to deliver such copies, shall be deemed to have the custody of such documents within the
meaning of this section.
Proof of
documents by
production of
certified
copies.
Proof of other
official
documents.

76. Such certified copies may be produced in proof of the contents of the public
documents or parts of the public documents of which they purport to be copies.

77. The following public documents may be proved as follows:—
(a) Acts, orders or notifications of the Central Government in any of its Ministries
and Departments or of any State Government or any Department of any State
Government or Union territory Administration—
(i) by the records of the Departments, certified by the head of those
Departments respectively; or
(ii) by any document purporting to be printed by order of any such
Government;
(b) the proceedings of Parliament or a State Legislature, by the journals of those
bodies respectively, or by published Acts or abstracts, or by copies purporting to be
printed by order of the Government concerned;
(c) proclamations, orders or Regulations issued by the President of India or the
Governor of a State or the Administrator or Lieutenant Governor of a Union territory,
by copies or extracts contained in the Official Gazette;
(d) the Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of the Legislature of a foreign
country, by journals published by their authority, or commonly received in that country
as such, or by a copy certified under the seal of the country or sovereign, or by a
recognition thereof in any Central Act;
(e) the proceedings of a municipal or local body in a State, by a copy of such
proceedings, certified by the legal keeper thereof, or by a printed book purporting to
be published by the authority of such body;
(f) public documents of any other class in a foreign country, by the original or
by a copy certified by the legal keeper thereof, with a certificate under the seal of a
Notary Public, or of an Indian Consul or diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly
certified by the officer having the legal custody of the original, and upon proof of the
character of the document according to the law of the foreign country.
Presumptions as to documents

Presumption
as to
genuineness of
certified
copies.

78. (1) The Court shall presume to be genuine every document purporting to be a
certificate, certified copy or other document, which is by law declared to be admissible as
evidence of any particular fact and which purports to be duly certified by any officer of the
Central Government or of a State Government:
Provided that such document is substantially in the form and purports to be executed
in the manner directed by law in that behalf.
(2) The Court shall also presume that any officer by whom any such document
purports to be signed or certified, held, when he signed it, the official character which he
claims in such paper.

Presumption as
to documents
produced as
record of
evidence, etc.

79. Whenever any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a record
or memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of the evidence, given by a witness in a
judicial proceeding or before any officer authorised by law to take such evidence or to be a
statement or confession by any prisoner or accused person, taken in accordance with law,

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
27
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, or by any such officer as aforesaid,
the Court shall presume that—
(i) the document is genuine;
(ii) any statements as to the circumstances under which it was taken, purporting
to be made by the person signing it, are true; and
(iii) such evidence, statement or confession was duly taken.
80. The Court shall presume the genuineness of every document purporting to be
the Official Gazette, or to be a newspaper or journal, and of every document purporting to be
a document directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such document is kept
substantially in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody.

Presumption
as to Gazettes,
newspapers,
and other
documents.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 92, document is said to
be in proper custody if it is in the place in which, and looked after by the person with whom
such document is required to be kept; but no custody is improper if it is proved to have had
a legitimate origin, or if the circumstances of the particular case are such as to render that
origin probable.
81. The Court shall presume the genuineness of every electronic or digital record
purporting to be the Official Gazette, or purporting to be electronic or digital record directed
by any law to be kept by any person, if such electronic or digital record is kept substantially
in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody.

Presumption
as to Gazettes
in electronic
or digital
record.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 93 electronic records are
said to be in proper custody if they are in the place in which, and looked after by the person
with whom such document is required to be kept; but no custody is improper if it is proved
to have had a legitimate origin, or the circumstances of the particular case are such as to
render that origin probable.
82. The Court shall presume that maps or plans purporting to be made by the authority
of the Central Government or any State Government were so made, and are accurate; but
maps or plans made for the purposes of any cause must be proved to be accurate.

Presumption
as to maps or
plans made by
authority of
Government.

83. The Court shall presume the genuineness of, every book purporting to be printed
or published under the authority of the Government of any country, and to contain any of
the laws of that country, and of every book purporting to contain reports of decisions of the
Courts of such country.

Presumption as
to collections
of laws and
reports of
decisions.

84. The Court shall presume that every document purporting to be a Presumption
power-of-attorney, and to have been executed before, and authenticated by, a Notary Public, as to powersof-attorney.
or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative of the
Central Government, was so executed and authenticated.
85. The Court shall presume that every electronic record purporting to be an agreement Presumption as
containing the electronic or digital signature of the parties was so concluded by affixing the to electronic
agreements.
electronic or digital signature of the parties.
86. (1) In any proceeding involving a secure electronic record, the Court shall presume
unless contrary is proved, that the secure electronic record has not been altered since the
specific point of time to which the secure status relates.
(2) In any proceeding, involving secure electronic signature, the Court shall presume
unless the contrary is proved that—
(a) the secure electronic signature is affixed by subscriber with the intention of
signing or approving the electronic record;
(b) except in the case of a secure electronic record or a secure electronic signature,
nothing in this section shall create any presumption, relating to authenticity and
integrity of the electronic record or any electronic signature.

Presumption
as to
electronic
records and
electronic
signatures.

28
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
Presumption as
to Electronic
Signature
Certificates.

87. The Court shall presume, unless contrary is proved, that the information listed in
an Electronic Signature Certificate is correct, except for information specified as subscriber
information which has not been verified, if the certificate was accepted by the subscriber.

Presumption
as to certified
copies of
foreign judicial
records.

88. (1) The Court may presume that any document purporting to be a certified copy of
any judicial record of any country beyond India is genuine and accurate, if the document
purports to be certified in any manner which is certified by any representative of the Central
Government in or for such country to be the manner commonly in use in that country for the
certification of copies of judicial records.
(2) An officer who, with respect to any territory or place outside India is a Political
Agent therefor, as defined in clause (43) of section 3 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall,
for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be a representative of the Central Government
in and for the country comprising that territory or place.

Presumption
as to books,
maps and
charts.

89. The Court may presume that any book to which it may refer for information on
matters of public or general interest, and that any published map or chart, the statements of
which are relevant facts, and which is produced for its inspection, was written and published
by the person, and at the time and place, by whom or at which it purports to have been
written or published.

Presumption
as to
electronic
messages.

90. The Court may presume that an electronic message, forwarded by the originator
through an electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the message purports to be
addressed corresponds with the message as fed into his computer for transmission; but the
Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was sent.

Presumption as
to due
execution, etc.,
of documents
not produced.

91. The Court shall presume that every document, called for and not produced after
notice to produce, was attested, stamped and executed in the manner required by law.

Presumption
as to
documents
thirty years
old.

92. Where any document, purporting or proved to be thirty years old, is produced
from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court may
presume that the signature and every other part of such document, which purports to be in
the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person's handwriting, and, in the case of
a document executed or attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the persons by
whom it purports to be executed and attested.
Explanation.—The Explanation to section 80 shall also apply to this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A has been in possession of landed property for a long time. He produces from
his custody deeds relating to the land showing his titles to it. The custody shall be proper.
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of which he is the mortgagee. The
mortgagor is in possession. The custody shall be proper.
(c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to lands in B's possession, which
were deposited with him by B for safe custody. The custody shall be proper.

Presumption
as to
electronic
records five
years old.

93. Where any electronic record, purporting or proved to be five years old, is produced
from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court may
presume that the electronic signature which purports to be the electronic signature of any
particular person was so affixed by him or any person authorised by him in this behalf.
Explanation.—The Explanation to section 81 shall also apply to this section.

10 of 1897.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
29
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VI
OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL EVIDENCE BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
94. When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition of property,
have been reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any matter is
required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof
of the terms of such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or of such matter,
except the document itself, or secondary evidence of its contents in cases in which secondary
evidence is admissible under the provisions hereinbefore contained.
Exception 1.—When a public officer is required by law to be appointed in writing,
and when it is shown that any particular person has acted as such officer, the writing by
which he is appointed need not be proved.

Evidence of
terms of
contracts,
grants and
other
dispositions of
property
reduced to form
of document.

Exception 2.—Wills admitted to probate in India may be proved by the probate.
Explanation 1.—This section applies equally to cases in which the contracts, grants
or dispositions of property referred to are contained in one document, and to cases in which
they are contained in more documents than one.
Explanation 2.—Where there are more originals than one, one original only need be
proved.
Explanation 3.—The statement, in any document whatever, of a fact other than the
facts referred to in this section, shall not preclude the admission of oral evidence as to the
same fact.
Illustrations.
(a) If a contract be contained in several letters, all the letters in which it is contained
must be proved.
(b) If a contract is contained in a bill of exchange, the bill of exchange must be
proved.
(c) If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three, one only need be proved.
(d) A contracts, in writing, with B, for the delivery of indigo upon certain terms. The
contract mentions the fact that B had paid A the price of other indigo contracted for verbally
on another occasion. Oral evidence is offered that no payment was made for the other
indigo. The evidence is admissible.
(e) A gives B a receipt for money paid by B. Oral evidence is offered of the payment.
The evidence is admissible.
95. When the terms of any such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or
any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, have been proved
according to section 94, no evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted,
as between the parties to any such instrument or their representatives in interest, for the
purpose of contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from, its terms:
Provided that any fact may be proved which would invalidate any document, or
which would entitle any person to any decree or order relating thereto; such as fraud,
intimidation, illegality, want of due execution, want of capacity in any contracting party,
want or failure of consideration, or mistake in fact or law:
Provided further that the existence of any separate oral agreement as to any matter on
which a document is silent, and which is not inconsistent with its terms, may be proved. In
considering whether or not this proviso applies, the Court shall have regard to the degree
of formality of the document:
Provided also that the existence of any separate oral agreement, constituting a condition
precedent to the attaching of any obligation under any such contract, grant or disposition
of property, may be proved:
Provided also that the existence of any distinct subsequent oral agreement to rescind
or modify any such contract, grant or disposition of property, may be proved, except in

Exclusion of
evidence of
oral
agreement.

30
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

cases in which such contract, grant or disposition of property is by law required to be in
writing, or has been registered according to the law in force for the time being as to the
registration of documents:
Provided also that any usage or custom by which incidents not expressly mentioned
in any contract are usually annexed to contracts of that description, may be proved:
Provided also that the annexing of such incident would not be repugnant to, or
inconsistent with, the express terms of the contract:
Provided also that any fact may be proved which shows in what manner the language
of a document is related to existing facts.
Illustrations.
(a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods "in ships from Kolkata to
Visakhapatnam". The goods are shipped in a particular ship which is lost. The fact that
particular ship was orally excepted from the policy, cannot be proved.
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B one thousand rupees on the
1st March, 2023. The fact that, at the same time, an oral agreement was made that the money
should not be paid till the 31st March, 2023, cannot be proved.
(c) An estate called "the Rampur tea estate" is sold by a deed which contains a map
of the property sold. The fact that land not included in the map had always been regarded
as part of the estate and was meant to pass by the deed cannot be proved.
(d) A enters into a written contract with B to work certain mines, the property of B,
upon certain terms. A was induced to do so by a misrepresentation of B's as to their value.
This fact may be proved.
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the specific performance of a contract, and also
prays that the contract may be reformed as to one of its provisions, as that provision was
inserted in it by mistake. A may prove that such a mistake was made as would by law entitle
him to have the contract reformed.
(f) A orders goods of B by a letter in which nothing is said as to the time of payment,
and accepts the goods on delivery. B sues A for the price. A may show that the goods were
supplied on credit for a term still unexpired.
(g) A sells B a horse and verbally warrants him sound. A gives B a paper in these
words—"Bought of A a horse for thirty thousand rupees". B may prove the verbal warranty.
(h) A hires lodgings of B, and gives B a card on which is written—"Rooms, ten
thousand rupees a month". A may prove a verbal agreement that these terms were to
include partial board. A hires lodging of B for a year, and a regularly stamped agreement,
drawn up by an advocate, is made between them. It is silent on the subject of board. A may
not prove that board was included in the term verbally.
(i) A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a receipt for the money. B keeps the
receipt and does not send the money. In a suit for the amount, A may prove this.
(j) A and B make a contract in writing to take effect upon the happening of a certain
contingency. The writing is left with B who sues A upon it. A may show the circumstances
under which it was delivered.
Exclusion of
evidence to
explain or
amend
ambiguous
document.

96. When the language used in a document is, on its face, ambiguous or defective,
evidence may not be given of facts which would show its meaning or supply its defects.

Illustrations.
(a) A agrees, in writing, to sell a horse to B for "one lakh rupees or one lakh fifty
thousand rupees". Evidence cannot be given to show which price was to be given.
(b) A deed contains blanks. Evidence cannot be given of facts which would show
how they were meant to be filled.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
31
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

97. When language used in a document is plain in itself, and when it applies accurately
to existing facts, evidence may not be given to show that it was not meant to apply to such
facts.
Illustration.

Exclusion of
evidence
against
application of
document to
existing facts.

A sells to B, by deed, "my estate at Rampur containing one hundred bighas". A has an
estate at Rampur containing one hundred bighas. Evidence may not be given of the fact
that the estate meant to be sold was one situated at a different place and of a different size.
98. When language used in a document is plain in itself, but is unmeaning in reference Evidence as to
document
to existing facts, evidence may be given to show that it was used in a peculiar sense.
Illustration.
A sells to B, by deed, "my house in Kolkata". A had no house in Kolkata, but it
appears that he had a house at Howrah, of which B had been in possession since the
execution of the deed. These facts may be proved to show that the deed related to the
house at Howrah.
99. When the facts are such that the language used might have been meant to apply
to any one, and could not have been meant to apply to more than one, of several persons or
things, evidence may be given of facts which show which of those persons or things it was
intended to apply to.
Illustrations.

unmeaning in
reference to
existing facts.

Evidence as to
application of
language which
can apply to
one only of
several persons.

(a) A agrees to sell to B, for one thousand rupees, "my white horse". A has two white
horses. Evidence may be given of facts which show which of them was meant.
(b) A agrees to accompany B to Ramgarh. Evidence may be given of facts showing
whether Ramgarh in Rajasthan or Ramgarh in Uttarakhand was meant.
100. When the language used applies partly to one set of existing facts, and partly to
another set of existing facts, but the whole of it does not apply correctly to either, evidence
may be given to show to which of the two it was meant to apply.
Illustration.
A agrees to sell to B "my land at X in the occupation of Y". A has land at X, but not
in the occupation of Y, and he has land in the occupation of Y but it is not at X. Evidence
may be given of facts showing which he meant to sell.
101. Evidence may be given to show the meaning of illegible or not commonly
intelligible characters, of foreign, obsolete, technical, local and regional expressions, of
abbreviations and of words used in a peculiar sense.
Illustration.

Evidence as to
application of
language to one
of two sets of
facts, to
neither of
which the
whole correctly
applies.
Evidence as to
meaning of
illegible
characters,
etc.

A, sculptor, agrees to sell to B, "all my mods". A has both models and modelling tools.
Evidence may be given to show which he meant to sell.
102. Persons who are not parties to a document, or their representatives in interest,
may give evidence of any facts tending to show a contemporaneous agreement varying the
terms of the document.
Illustration.

Who may
give evidence
of agreement
varying terms
of document.

A and B make a contract in writing that B shall sell A certain cotton, to be paid for on
delivery. At the same time, they make an oral agreement that three months’ credit shall be
given to A. This could not be shown as between A and B, but it might be shown by C, if it
affected his interests.
39 of 1925.

103. Nothing in this Chapter shall be taken to affect any of the provisions of the Saving of
provisions of
Indian Succession Act, 1925 as to the construction of wills.

Indian
Succession Act
relating to
wills.

32
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

PARTIV
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII
OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
Burden of
proof.

104. Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability
dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts must prove that those facts exist, and
when a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof
lies on that person.
Illustrations.
(a) A desires a Court to give judgment that B shall be punished for a crime which A
says B has committed. A must prove that B has committed the crime.
(b) A desires a Court to give judgment that he is entitled to certain land in the
possession of B, by reason of facts which he asserts, and which B denies, to be true. A must
prove the existence of those facts.

On whom
burden of
proof lies.

105. The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if
no evidence at all were given on either side.
Illustrations.
(a) A sues B for land of which B is in possession, and which, as A asserts, was left to
A by the will of C, B's father. If no evidence were given on either side, B would be entitled to
retain his possession. Therefore, the burden of proof is on A.
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond. The execution of the bond is admitted, but B
says that it was obtained by fraud, which A denies. If no evidence were given on either side,
A would succeed, as the bond is not disputed and the fraud is not proved. Therefore, the
burden of proof is on B.

Burden of
proof as to
particular fact.

106. The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the
Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the proof of that fact
shall lie on any particular person.
Illustration.
A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the Court to believe that B admitted the theft to
C. A must prove the admission. B wishes the Court to believe that, at the time in question,
he was elsewhere. He must prove it.

Burden of
proving fact
to be proved
to make
evidence
admissible.

107. The burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in order to enable any
person to give evidence of any other fact is on the person who wishes to give such
evidence.
Illustrations.
(a) A wishes to prove a dying declaration by B. A must prove B's death.
(b) A wishes to prove, by secondary evidence, the contents of a lost document. A
must prove that the document has been lost.

Burden of
proving that
case of accused
comes within
exceptions.

108. When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of
circumstances bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions in the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or within any special exception or proviso contained in any other part
of the said Sanhita, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the Court shall
presume the absence of such circumstances.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
33
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

Illustrations.
(a) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of unsoundness of mind, he did not
know the nature of the act. The burden of proof is on A.
(b) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and sudden provocation, he was
deprived of the power of self-control. The burden of proof is on A.
(c) Section 117 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 provides that whoever, except in
the case provided for by sub-section (2) of section 122, voluntarily causes grievous hurt,
shall be subject to certain punishments. A is charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt
under section 117. The burden of proving the circumstances bringing the case under
sub-section (2) of section 122 lies on A.
109. When any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of
proving that fact is upon him.
Illustrations.

Burden of
proving fact
especially
within
knowledge.

(a) When a person does an act with some intention other than that which the character
and circumstances of the act suggest, the burden of proving that intention is upon him.
(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without a ticket. The burden of proving
that he had a ticket is on him.
110. When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown that he was
alive within thirty years, the burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who affirms
it.

Burden of
proving death
of person
known to
have been
alive within
thirty years.

111. When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is proved that he has
not been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if he had
been alive, the burden of proving that he is alive is shifted to the person who affirms it.

Burden of
proving that
person is alive
who has not
been heard of
for seven
years.

112. When the question is whether persons are partners, landlord and tenant, or
principal and agent, and it has been shown that they have been acting as such, the burden
of proving that they do not stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other in those
relationships respectively, is on the person who affirms it.

Burden of
proof as to
relationship in
the cases of
partners,
landlord and
tenant,
principal and
agent.

113. When the question is whether any person is owner of anything of which he is Burden of
shown to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the person proof as to
ownership.
who affirms that he is not the owner.
114. Where there is a question as to the good faith of a transaction between parties,
one of whom stands to the other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving
the good faith of the transaction is on the party who is in a position of active confidence.
Illustrations.
(a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an advocate is in question in a suit brought
by the client. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the advocate.
(b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a father is in question in a suit
brought by the son. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the father.

Proof of good
faith in
transactions
where one
party is in
relation of
active
confidence.

34
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
Presumption
as to certain
offences.

115. (1) Where a person is accused of having committed any offence specified in
sub-section (2), in—
(a) any area declared to be a disturbed area under any enactment for the time
being in force, making provision for the suppression of disorder and restoration and
maintenance of public order; or
(b) any area in which there has been, over a period of more than one month,
extensive disturbance of the public peace,
and it is shown that such person had been at a place in such area at a time when firearms or
explosives were used at or from that place to attack or resist the members of any armed
forces or the forces charged with the maintenance of public order acting in the discharge of
their duties, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is shown, that such person had
committed such offence.
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are the following, namely:—
(a) an offence under section 147, section 148, section 149 or section 150 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(b) criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abetment of, an offence under
section 149 or section 150 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.

Birth during
marriage,
conclusive
proof of
legitimacy.

116. The fact that any person was born during the continuance of a valid marriage
between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and eighty days after its dissolution,
the mother remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the legitimate child of
that man, unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each other
at any time when he could have been begotten.

Presumption
as to abetment
of suicide by a
married
woman.

117. When the question is whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been
abetted by her husband or any relative of her husband and it is shown that she had
committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her marriage and that her
husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the Court may
presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had
been abetted by her husband or by such relative of her husband.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" shall have the same meaning
as in section 86 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.

Presumption
as to dowry
death.

118. When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a
woman and it is shown that soon before her death, such woman had been subjected by
such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the
Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same
meaning as in section 80 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.

Court may
presume
existence of
certain facts.

119. (1) The Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have
happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct and
public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.
Illustrations.
The Court may presume that—
(a) a man who is in possession of stolen goods soon, after the theft is either the
thief or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for
his possession;
(b) an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material
particulars;

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
35
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(c) a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for good
consideration;
(d) a thing or state of things which has been shown to be in existence within a
period shorter than that within which such things or state of things usually cease to
exist, is still in existence;
(e) judicial and official acts have been regularly performed;
(f) the common course of business has been followed in particular cases;
(g) evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be
unfavourable to the person who withholds it;
(h) if a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled to answer
by law, the answer, if given, would be unfavourable to him;
(i) when a document creating an obligation is in the hands of the obligor, the
obligation has been discharged.
(2) The Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering
whether such maxims do or do not apply to the particular case before it:—
(i) as to Illustration (a)—a shop-keeper has in his bill a marked rupee soon after
it was stolen, and cannot account for its possession specifically, but is continually
receiving rupees in the course of his business;
(ii) as to Illustration (b)—A, a person of the highest character, is tried for
causing a man's death by an act of negligence in arranging certain machinery. B, a
person of equally good character, who also took part in the arrangement, describes
precisely what was done, and admits and explains the common carelessness of A and
himself;
(iii) as to Illustration (b)—a crime is committed by several persons. A, B and C,
three of the criminals, are captured on the spot and kept apart from each other. Each
gives an account of the crime implicating D, and the accounts corroborate each other
in such a manner as to render previous concert highly improbable;
(iv) as to Illustration (c)—A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of
business. B, the acceptor, was a young and ignorant person, completely under A's
influence;
(v) as to Illustration (d)—it is proved that a river ran in a certain course five
years ago, but it is known that there have been floods since that time which might
change its course;
(vi) as to Illustration (e)—a judicial act, the regularity of which is in question,
was performed under exceptional circumstances;
(vii) as to Illustration (f)—the question is, whether a letter was received. It is
shown to have been posted, but the usual course of the post was interrupted by
disturbances;
(viii) as to Illustration (g)—a man refuses to produce a document which would
bear on a contract of small importance on which he is sued, but which might also
injure the feelings and reputation of his family;
(ix) as to Illustration (h)—a man refuses to answer a question which he is not
compelled by law to answer, but the answer to it might cause loss to him in matters
unconnected with the matter in relation to which it is asked;
(x) as to Illustration (i)—a bond is in possession of the obligor, but the
circumstances of the case are such that he may have stolen it.
120. In a prosecution for rape under sub-section (2) of section 64 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the question
is whether it was without the consent of the woman alleged to have been raped and such
woman states in her evidence before the Court that she did not consent, the Court shall
presume that she did not consent.

Presumption
as to absence
of consent in
certain
prosecution
for rape.

36
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

Explanation.—In this section, "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in section 63 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
CHAPTER VIII
ESTOPPEL
Estoppel.

121. When one person has, by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally caused
or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither
he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and
such person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing.
Illustration.
A intentionally and falsely leads B to believe that certain land belongs to A, and
thereby induces B to buy and pay for it. The land afterwards becomes the property of A,
and A seeks to set aside the sale on the ground that, at the time of the sale, he had no title.
He must not be allowed to prove his want of title.

Estoppel of
tenant and of
licensee of
person in
possession.

122. No tenant of immovable property, or person claiming through such tenant, shall,
during the continuance of the tenancy or any time thereafter, be permitted to deny that the
landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a title to such immovable
property; and no person who came upon any immovable property by the licence of the
person in possession thereof shall be permitted to deny that such person had a title to such
possession at the time when such licence was given.

Estoppel of
acceptor of
bill of
exchange,
bailee or
licensee.

123. No acceptor of a bill of exchange shall be permitted to deny that the drawer had
authority to draw such bill or to endorse it; nor shall any bailee or licensee be permitted to
deny that his bailor or licensor had, at the time when the bailment or licence commenced,
authority to make such bailment or grant such licence.
Explanation 1.—The acceptor of a bill of exchange may deny that the bill was really
drawn by the person by whom it purports to have been drawn.
Explanation 2.—If a bailee delivers the goods bailed to a person other than the
bailor, he may prove that such person had a right to them as against the bailor.
CHAPTER IX
OF WITNESSES

Who may
testify.

124. All persons shall be competent to testify unless the Court considers that they
are prevented from understanding the questions put to them, or from giving rational answers
to those questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of body or mind, or
any other cause of the same kind.
Explanation.—A person of unsound mind is not incompetent to testify, unless he is
prevented by his unsoundness of mind from understanding the questions put to him and
giving rational answers to them.

Witness
unable to
communicate
verbally.

125. A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in any other manner in
which he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such writing must be written
and the signs made in open Court and evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral
evidence:
Provided that if the witness is unable to communicate verbally, the Court shall take
the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement, and such
statement shall be videographed.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
37
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

126. (1) In all civil proceedings the parties to the suit, and the husband or wife of any Competency
of husband and
party to the suit, shall be competent witnesses.
wife as

(2) In criminal proceedings against any person, the husband or wife of such person, witnesses in
certain cases.
respectively, shall be a competent witness.
127. No Judge or Magistrate shall, except upon the special order of some Court to Judges and
which he is subordinate, be compelled to answer any question as to his own conduct in Magistrates.
Court as such Judge or Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his knowledge in Court
as such Judge or Magistrate; but he may be examined as to other matters which occurred in
his presence whilst he was so acting.
Illustrations.
(a) A, on his trial before the Court of Session, says that a deposition was improperly
taken by B, the Magistrate. B cannot be compelled to answer questions as to this, except
upon the special order of a superior Court.
(b) A is accused before the Court of Session of having given false evidence before B,
a Magistrate. B cannot be asked what A said, except upon the special order of the superior
Court.
(c) A is accused before the Court of Session of attempting to murder a police officer
whilst on his trial before B, a Sessions Judge. B may be examined as to what occurred.
128. No person who is or has been married, shall be compelled to disclose any Communications
communication made to him during marriage by any person to whom he is or has been during
married; nor shall he be permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the person marriage.
who made it, or his representative in interest, consents, except in suits between married
persons, or proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted for any crime committed
against the other.
129. No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from unpublished official Evidence as to
records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at the head affairs of
of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit. State.
130. No public officer shall be compelled to disclose communications made to him in Official
official confidence, when he considers that the public interests would suffer by the disclosure. communications.
131. No Magistrate or police officer shall be compelled to say when he got any
information as to the commission of any offence, and no revenue officer shall be compelled
to say when he got any information as to the commission of any offence against the public
revenue.

Information
as to
commission of
offences.

Explanation.—"revenue officer" means any officer employed in or about the business
of any branch of the public revenue.
132. (1) No advocate, shall at any time be permitted, unless with his client's express Professional
consent, to disclose any communication made to him in the course and for the purpose of communications.
his service as such advocate, by or on behalf of his client, or to state the contents or
condition of any document with which he has become acquainted in the course and for the
purpose of his professional service, or to disclose any advice given by him to his client in
the course and for the purpose of such service:
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect from disclosure of—
(a) any such communication made in furtherance of any illegal purpose;
(b) any fact observed by any advocate, in the course of his service as such,
showing that any crime or fraud has been committed since the commencement of his
service.

38
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

(2) It is immaterial whether the attention of such advocate referred to in the proviso to
sub-section (1), was or was not directed to such fact by or on behalf of his client.
Explanation.—The obligation stated in this section continues after the professional
service has ceased.
Illustrations.
(a) A, a client, says to B, an advocate—"I have committed forgery, and I wish you to
defend me". As the defence of a man known to be guilty is not a criminal purpose, this
communication is protected from disclosure.
(b) A, a client, says to B, an advocate—"I wish to obtain possession of property by
the use of a forged deed on which I request you to sue". This communication, being made
in furtherance of a criminal purpose, is not protected from disclosure.
(c) A, being charged with embezzlement, retains B, an advocate, to defend him. In the
course of the proceedings, B observes that an entry has been made in A's account book,
charging A with the sum said to have been embezzled, which entry was not in the book at
the commencement of his professional service. This being a fact observed by B in the
course of his service, showing that a fraud has been committed since the commencement of
the proceedings, it is not protected from disclosure.
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply to interpreters, and the clerks or
employees of advocates.
Privilege not
waived by
volunteering
evidence.

133. If any party to a suit gives evidence therein at his own instance or otherwise, he
shall not be deemed to have consented thereby to such disclosure as is mentioned in
section 132; and, if any party to a suit or proceeding calls any such advocate, as a witness,
he shall be deemed to have consented to such disclosure only if he questions such advocate,
on matters which, but for such question, he would not be at liberty to disclose.

Confidential
communication
with legal
advisers.

134. No one shall be compelled to disclose to the Court any confidential communication
which has taken place between him and his legal adviser, unless he offers himself as a
witness, in which case he may be compelled to disclose any such communications as may
appear to the Court necessary to be known in order to explain any evidence which he has
given, but no others.

Production of
title-deeds of
witness not a
party.

135. No witness who is not a party to a suit shall be compelled to produce his
title-deeds to any property, or any document in virtue of which he holds any property as
pledgee or mortgagee or any document the production of which might tend to criminate
him, unless he has agreed in writing to produce them with the person seeking the production
of such deeds or some person through whom he claims.

Production of
documents or
electronic
records which
another
person, having
possession,
could refuse to
produce.

136. No one shall be compelled to produce documents in his possession or electronic
records under his control, which any other person would be entitled to refuse to produce if
they were in his possession or control, unless such last-mentioned person consents to
their production.

Witness not
excused from
answering on
ground that
answer will
criminate.

137. A witness shall not be excused from answering any question as to any matter
relevant to the matter in issue in any suit or in any civil or criminal proceeding, upon the
ground that the answer to such question will criminate, or may tend directly or indirectly to
criminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or tend directly or indirectly to expose, such
witness to a penalty or forfeiture of any kind:
Provided that no such answer, which a witness shall be compelled to give, shall
subject him to any arrest or prosecution, or be proved against him in any criminal proceeding,
except a prosecution forgiving false evidence by such answer.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
39
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

138. An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person; Accomplice.
and a conviction is not illegal if it proceeds upon the corroborated testimony of an
accomplice.
139. No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of Number of
witnesses.
any fact.
CHAPTER X
OF EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
140. The order in which witnesses are produced and examined shall be regulated by
the law and practice for the time being relating to civil and criminal procedure respectively,
and, in the absence of any such law, by the discretion of the Court.

Order of
production
and
examination
of witnesses.

141. (1) When either party proposes to give evidence of any fact, the Judge may ask
the party proposing to give the evidence in what manner the alleged fact, if proved, would
be relevant; and the Judge shall admit the evidence if he thinks that the fact, if proved,
would be relevant, and not otherwise.

Judge to decide
as to
admissibility
of evidence.

(2) If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is admissible only upon
proof of some other fact, such last mentioned fact must be proved before evidence is given
of the fact first mentioned, unless the party undertakes to give proof of such fact, and the
Court is satisfied with such undertaking.
(3) If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon another alleged fact being first
proved, the Judge may, in his discretion, either permit evidence of the first fact to be given
before the second fact is proved, or require evidence to be given of the second fact before
evidence is given of the first fact.
Illustrations.
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a relevant fact by a person alleged to be
dead, which statement is relevant under section 26. The fact that the person is dead must be
proved by the person proposing to prove the statement, before evidence is given of the
statement.
(b) It is proposed to prove, by a copy, the contents of a document said to be lost. The
fact that the original is lost must be proved by the person proposing to produce the copy,
before the copy is produced.
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property knowing it to have been stolen. It is
proposed to prove that he denied the possession of the property. The relevancy of the
denial depends on the identity of the property. The Court may, in its discretion, either
require the property to be identified before the denial of the possession is proved, or permit
the denial of the possession to be proved before the property is identified.
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact A which is said to have been the cause or effect of a
fact in issue. There are several intermediate facts B, C and D which must be shown to exist
before the fact A can be regarded as the cause or effect of the fact in issue. The Court may
either permit A to be proved before B, C or D is proved, or may require proof of B, C and D
before permitting proof of A.
142. (1) The examination of a witness by the party who calls him shall be called his Examination
of witnesses.
examination-in-chief.
(2) The examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his
cross-examination.
(3) The examination of a witness, subsequent to the cross-examination, by the party
who called him, shall be called his re-examination.

40
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
Order of
examinations.

143. (1) Witnesses shall be first examined-in-chief, then (if the adverse party so
desires) cross-examined, then (if the party calling him so desires) re-examined.
(2) The examination-in-chief and cross-examination must relate to relevant facts, but
the cross-examination need not be confined to the facts to which the witness testified on
his examination-in-chief.
(3) The re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of matters referred to in
cross-examination; and, if new matter is, by permission of the Court, introduced in
re-examination, the adverse party may further cross-examine upon that matter.

Crossexamination
of person
called to
produce a
document.
Witnesses to
character.
Leading
questions.

144. A person summoned to produce a document does not become a witness by the
mere fact that he produces it, and cannot be cross-examined unless and until he is called as
a witness.

145. Witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-examined.
146. (1) Any question suggesting the answer which the person putting it wishes or
expects to receive, is called a leading question.
(2) Leading questions must not, if objected to by the adverse party, be asked in an
examination-in-chief, or in a re-examination, except with the permission of the Court.
(3) The Court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are introductory or
undisputed, or which have, in its opinion, been already sufficiently proved.
(4) Leading questions may be asked in cross-examination.

Evidence as to
matters in
writing.

147. Any witness may be asked, while under examination, whether any contract,
grant or other disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence, was not contained
in a document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about to make any statement as to the
contents of any document, which, in the opinion of the Court, ought to be produced, the
adverse party may object to such evidence being given until such document is produced,
or until facts have been proved which entitle the party who called the witness to give
secondary evidence of it.
Explanation.—A witness may give oral evidence of statements made by other persons
about the contents of documents if such statements are in themselves relevant facts.
Illustration.
The question is, whether A assaulted B. C deposes that he heard A say to D—"B
wrote a letter accusing me of theft, and I will be revenged on him". This statement is
relevant, as showing A's motive for the assault, and evidence may be given of it, though no
other evidence is given about the letter.

Crossexamination
as to previous
statements in
writing.

148. A witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements made by him in
writing or reduced into writing, and relevant to matters in question, without such writing
being shown to him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to contradict him by the writing,
his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to those parts of it which are
to be used for the purpose of contradicting him.

Questions
lawful in
crossexamination.

149. When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in addition to the questions
hereinbefore referred to, be asked any questions which tend—
(a) to test his veracity; or
(b) to discover who he is and what is his position in life; or
(c) to shake his credit, by injuring his character, although the answer to such
questions might tend directly or indirectly to criminate him, or might expose or tend
directly or indirectly to expose him to a penalty or forfeiture:

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
41
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under section 64, section 65, section 66,
section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
2023 or for attempt to commit any such offence, where the question of consent is an issue,
it shall not be permissible to adduce evidence or to put questions in the cross-examination
of the victim as to the general immoral character, or previous sexual experience, of such
victim with any person for proving such consent or the quality of consent.
150. If any such question relates to a matter relevant to the suit or proceeding, the When witness
to be
provisions of section 137 shall apply thereto.
compelled to
answer.

151. (1) If any such question relates to a matter not relevant to the suit or proceeding,
except in so far as it affects the credit of the witness by injuring his character, the Court shall
decide whether or not the witness shall be compelled to answer it, and may, if it thinks fit,
warn the witness that he is not obliged to answer it.
(2) In exercising its discretion, the Court shall have regard to the following
considerations, namely:—

Court to
decide when
question shall
be asked and
when witness
compelled to
answer.

(a) such questions are proper if they are of such a nature that the truth of the
imputation conveyed by them would seriously affect the opinion of the Court as to
the credibility of the witness on the matter to which he testifies;
(b) such questions are improper if the imputation which they convey relates to
matters so remote in time, or of such a character, that the truth of the imputation would
not affect, or would affect in a slight degree, the opinion of the Court as to the
credibility of the witness on the matter to which he testifies;
(c) such questions are improper if there is a great disproportion between the
importance of the imputation made against the witness's character and the importance
of his evidence;
(d) the Court may, if it sees fit, draw, from the witness's refusal to answer, the
inference that the answer if given would be unfavourable.
152. No such question as is referred to in section 151 ought to be asked, unless the
person asking it has reasonable grounds for thinking that the imputation which it conveys
is well-founded.
Illustrations.

Question not
to be asked
without
reasonable
grounds.

(a) An advocate is instructed by another advocate that an important witness is a
dacoit. This is a reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dacoit.
(b) An advocate is informed by a person in Court that an important witness is a dacoit.
The informant, on being questioned by the advocate, gives satisfactory reasons for his
statement. This is a reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dacoit.
(c) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, is asked at random whether he is
a dacoit. There are here no reasonable grounds for the question.
(d) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, being questioned as to his mode
of life and means of living, gives unsatisfactory answers. This may be a reasonable ground
for asking him if he is a dacoit.
153. If the Court is of opinion that any such question was asked without reasonable
grounds, it may, if it was asked by any advocate, report the circumstances of the case to the
High Court or other authority to which such advocate is subject in the exercise of his
profession.

Procedure of
Court in case
of question
being asked
without
reasonable
grounds.

42
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
Indecent and
scandalous
questions.

154. The Court may forbid any questions or inquiries which it regards as indecent or
scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may have some bearing on the questions
before the Court, unless they relate to facts in issue, or to matters necessary to be known in
order to determine whether or not the facts in issue existed.

Questions
intended to
insult or
annoy.

155. The Court shall forbid any question which appears to it to be intended to insult
or annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the Court needlessly offensive in
form.

Exclusion of
evidence to
contradict
answers to
questions
testing
veracity.

156. When a witness has been asked and has answered any question which is relevant
to the inquiry only in so far as it tends to shake his credit by injuring his character, no
evidence shall be given to contradict him; but, if he answers falsely, he may afterwards be
charged with giving false evidence.
Exception 1.—If a witness is asked whether he has been previously convicted of any
crime and denies it, evidence may be given of his previous conviction.
Exception 2.—If a witness is asked any question tending to impeach his impartiality,
and answers it by denying the facts suggested, he may be contradicted.
Illustrations.
(a) A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the ground of fraud. The claimant is
asked whether, in a former transaction, he had not made a fraudulent claim. He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim. The evidence is inadmissible.
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed from a situation for dishonesty.
He denies it. Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed for dishonesty. The evidence
is not admissible.
(c) A affirms that on a certain day he saw B at Goa. A is asked whether he himself was
not on that day at Varanasi. He denies it. Evidence is offered to show that A was on that day
at Varanasi. The evidence is admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact which affects his
credit, but as contradicting the alleged fact that B was seen on the day in question in Goa.
In each of these cases, the witness might, if his denial was false, be charged with giving
false evidence.
(d) A is asked whether his family has not had a blood feud with the family of B against
whom he gives evidence. He denies it. He may be contradicted on the ground that the
question tends to impeach his impartiality.

Question by
party to his
own witness.

157. (1) The Court may, in its discretion, permit the person who calls a witness to put
any question to him which might be put in cross-examination by the adverse party.
(2) Nothing in this section shall disentitle the person so permitted under
sub-section (1), to rely on any part of the evidence of such witness.

Impeaching
credit of
witness.

158. The credit of a witness may be impeached in the following ways by the adverse
party, or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him—
(a) by the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of
the witness, believe him to be unworthy of credit;
(b) by proof that the witness has been bribed, or has accepted the offer of a
bribe, or has received any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence;
(c) by proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence
which is liable to be contradicted.
Explanation.—A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of credit may
not, upon his examination-in-chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his
reasons in cross-examination, and the answers which he gives cannot be contradicted,
though, if they are false, he may afterwards be charged with giving false evidence.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
43
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

Illustrations.
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to B. C says that he delivered
the goods to B. Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said that he
had not delivered goods to B. The evidence is admissible.
(b) A is accused of the murder of B. C says that B, when dying, declared that A had
given B the wound of which he died. Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous
occasion, C said that B, when dying, did not declare that A had given B the wound of which
he died. The evidence is admissible.
159. When a witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any
relevant fact, he may be questioned as to any other circumstances which he observed at or
near to the time or place at which such relevant fact occurred, if the Court is of opinion that
such circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of the witness as to the
relevant fact which he testifies.

Questions
tending to
corroborate
evidence of
relevant fact,
admissible.

Illustration.
A, an accomplice, gives an account of a robbery in which he took part. He describes
various incidents unconnected with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from the
place where it was committed. Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order to
corroborate his evidence as to the robbery itself.
160. In order to corroborate the testimony of a witness, any former statement made by
such witness relating to the same fact, at or about the time when the fact took place, or
before any authority legally competent to investigate the fact, may be proved.

Former
statements of
witness may
be proved to
corroborate
later
testimony as
to same fact.

161. Whenever any statement, relevant under section 26 or 27, is proved, all matters
may be proved either in order to contradict or to corroborate it, or in order to impeach or
confirm the credit of the person by whom it was made, which might have been proved if that
person had been called as a witness and had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the
matter suggested.

What matters
may be proved
in connection
with proved
statement
relevant under
section 26 or
27.

162. (1) A witness may, while under examination, refresh his memory by referring to Refreshing
any writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which he is questioned, memory.
or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the transaction was at that time
fresh in his memory:
Provided that the witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other
person, and read by the witness within the time aforesaid, if when he read it, he knew it to be
correct.
(2) Whenever a witness may refresh his memory by reference to any document, he
may, with the permission of the Court, refer to a copy of such document:
Provided that the Court be satisfied that there is sufficient reason for the
non-production of the original:
Provided further that an expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional
treatises.
163. A witness may also testify to facts mentioned in any such document as is
mentioned in section 162, although he has no specific recollection of the facts themselves,
if he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document.

Testimony to
facts stated in
document
mentioned in
section 162.

44
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

Illustration.
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books regularly kept in the
course of business, if he knows that the books were correctly kept, although he has forgotten
the particular transactions entered.
Right of
adverse party
as to writing
used to refresh
memory.

164. Any writing referred to under the provisions of the two last preceding sections
shall be produced and shown to the adverse party if he requires it; such party may, if he
pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon.

Production of
documents.

165. (1) A witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in his possession or
power, bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production
or to its admissibility:
Provided that the validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the Court.
(2) The Court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of
State, or take other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility.
(3) If for such a purpose it is necessary to cause any document to be translated, the
Court may, if it thinks fit, direct the translator to keep the contents secret, unless the
document is to be given in evidence and, if the interpreter disobeys such direction, he shall
be held to have committed an offence under section 198 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023:
Provided that no Court shall require any communication between the Ministers and
the President of India to be produced before it.

Giving, as
evidence, of
document
called for and
produced on
notice.

166. When a party calls for a document which he has given the other party notice to
produce, and such document is produced and inspected by the party calling for its
production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the party producing it requires him to do so.

Using, as
evidence, of
document
production of
which was
refused on
notice.

167. When a party refuses to produce a document which he has had notice to produce,
he cannot afterwards use the document as evidence without the consent of the other party
or the order of the Court.

Judge's power
to put
questions or
order
production.

Illustration.
A sues B on an agreement and gives B notice to produce it. At the trial, A calls for the
document and B refuses to produce it. A gives secondary evidence of its contents. B seeks
to produce the document itself to contradict the secondary evidence given by A, or in order
to show that the agreement is not stamped. He cannot do so.
168. The Judge may, in order to discover or obtain proof of relevant facts, ask any
question he considers necessary, in any form, at any time, of any witness, or of the parties
about any fact; and may order the production of any document or thing; and neither the
parties nor their representatives shall be entitled to make any objection to any such question
or order, nor, without the leave of the Court, to cross-examine any witness upon any answer
given in reply to any such question:
Provided that the judgment must be based upon facts declared by this Adhiniyam to
be relevant, and duly proved:
Provided further that this section shall not authorise any Judge to compel any witness
to answer any question, or to produce any document which such witness would be entitled
to refuse to answer or produce under sections 127 to 136, both inclusive, if the question
were asked or the document were called for by the adverse party; nor shall the Judge ask
any question which it would be improper for any other person to ask under section 151 or
152; nor shall he dispense with primary evidence of any document, except in the cases
hereinbefore excepted.

Sec.
1]
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
45
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XI
OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE
169. The improper admission or rejection of evidence shall not be ground of itself for
a new trial or reversal of any decision in any case, if it shall appear to the Court before which
such objection is raised that, independently of the evidence objected to and admitted, there
was sufficient evidence to justify the decision, or that, if the rejected evidence had been
received, it ought not to have varied the decision.

No new trial
for improper
admission or
rejection of
evidence.

CHAPTER XII
REPEAL AND SAVINGS
1 of 1872.

1 of 1872.

170. (1) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, if, immediately before the date on which this
Adhiniyam comes into force, there is any application, trial, inquiry, investigation, proceeding
or appeal pending, then, such application, trial, inquiry, investigation, proceeding or appeal
shall be dealt with under the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, as in force
immediately before such commencement, as if this Adhiniyam had not come into force.

Repeal and
savings.

46
THE GAZETTE
OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[Part II—
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________

THE SCHEDULE
[See section 63(4)(c)]
CERTIFICATE
PART A
(To be filled by the Party)
I, _____________________ (Name), Son/daughter/spouse of ___________________
residing/employed at __________________________ do hereby solemnly affirm and
sincerely state and submit as follows:—
I have produced electronic record/output of the digital record taken from the following
device/digital record source (tick mark):—
Computer / Storage Media
CD/DVD

Server

DVR

Mobile

Cloud

Flash Drive

Other

Other: ________________________________________
Make & Model: _______________ Color: _______________
Serial Number: _______________
IMEI/UIN/UID/MAC/Cloud ID_____________________ (as applicable)
and any other relevant information, if any, about the device/digital record____(specify).
The digital device or the digital record source was under the lawful control for regularly
creating, storing or processing information for the purposes of carrying out regular
activities and during this period, the computer or the communication device was working
properly and the relevant information was regularly fed into the computer during the
ordinary course of business. If the computer/digital device at any point of time was not
working properly or out of operation, then it has not affected the electronic/digital
record or its accuracy. The digital device or the source of the digital record is:—
Owned

Maintained

Managed

Operated

by me (select as applicable).
I state that the HASH value/s of the electronic/digital record/s is _________________,
obtained through the following algorithm:—
SHA1:
SHA256:
MD5:
Other__________________ (Legally acceptable standard)
(Hash report to be enclosed with the certificate)

(Name and signature)
Date (DD/MM/YYYY): _____
Time (IST): ________hours (In 24 hours format)
Place: ____________

SEC. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

47

PART B
(To be filled by the Expert)
I, ____________________ (Name), Son/daughter/spouse of _____________________
residing/employed at _________________________ do hereby solemnly affirm and
sincerely state and submit as follows:—
The produced electronic record/output of the digital record are obtained from the following
device/digital record source (tick mark):—
Computer / Storage Media

DVR

CD/DVD

Cloud

Server

Mobile

Flash Drive

Other

Other: ________________________________________
Make & Model: _______________ Color: _______________
Serial Number: _______________
IMEI/UIN/UID/MAC/Cloud ID_____________________ (as applicable)
and any other relevant information, if any, about the device/digital record_______(specify).
I state that the HASH value/s of the electronic/digital record/s is _____________________,
obtained through the following algorithm:—
SHA1:
SHA256:
MD5:
Other__________________ (Legally acceptable standard)
(Hash report to be enclosed with the certificate)
(Name, designation and signature)
Date (DD/MM/YYYY): _____
Time (IST): ________hours (In 24 hours format)
Place: ____________

—————

DIWAKAR SINGH,
Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel to the Govt. of India.

UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
MGIPMRND—533GI(S3)—25-12-2023.

Kshitiz
Mohan

Digitally signed by Kshitiz Mohan
DN: c=IN, st=Delhi,
2.5.4.20=e8b886a9336825f4d863142c634f2f25e2e76d2f0b5f069af
1775fa98f7ccdab, postalCode=110002, street=Minto Road New
Delhi, pseudonym=5c90ab0ba7a48905de2428b65504151c,
serialNumber=0a5dc5b84f902a7bf2d6ed41c0c26429a0d4d5848d
d23eb18886abaeea31b247, ou=Deputy Manager, o=Government
of India Press, cn=Kshitiz Mohan
Date: 2023.12.25 21:14:13 +05'30'

THE COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957
(14 OF 1957)

THE COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957
ACT NO. 14 OF 19571
[4th June, 1957]
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to copyright.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1. Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Copyright Act, 1957.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Interpretation.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “adaptation” means,(i) in relation to a dramatic work, the conversion of the work into a non-dramatic work;
(ii) in relation to a literary work or an artistic work, the conversion of the work into a

dramatic work by way of performance in public or otherwise;
(iii) in relation to a literary or dramatic work, any abridgement of the work or any version

of the work in which the story or action is conveyed wholly or mainly by means of
pictures in a form suitable for reproduction in a book, or in a newspaper, magazine or
similar periodical;3[***]
(iv) in relation to a musical work, any arrangement or transcription of the work; 4[and]
4

[(v) in relation to any work, any use of such work involving its rearrangement or
alteration;]

[(aa) “Appellate Board” means the Appellate Board referred to in section 11;]

5

(b)

5

[“work of architecture”] means any building or structure having an artistic character or

1 The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962, sec. 3 and Schedule; to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by

Reg.
6 of 1963, sec. 2 and the First Schedule; to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, sec. 3 and the First Schedule; and brought into force in the State
of Sikkim (w.e.f. 27-4-1979) : vide notification No. S.O. 226(E), dated 27-4-1979, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii),
p.430.
2 Came into force on 21st January, 1958, vide S.R.O No. 269, dated 21st January 1958, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3,
p.167.
3 The word “and” omitted by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
4 Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
5 Subs. by s.2, ibid. for “architectural work of art” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).

design, or any model for such building or structure;
(c) “artistic work” means,—
(i) a painting, a sculpture, a drawing (including a diagram, map, chart or plan), an engraving or a

photograph, whether or not any such work possesses artistic quality;
(ii) a 1[work of architecture]; and
(iii) any other work of artistic craftsmanship;
(d) “author” means, —
(i)

in relation to a literary or dramatic work, the author of the work;

(ii) in relation to a musical work, the composer;
(iii) in relation to an artistic work other than a photograph, the artist;
(iv) in relation to a photograph, the person taking the photograph;
2

[(v) in relation to a cinematograph film or sound recording, the producer; and
(vi) in relation to any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work which is computer-generated, the person
who causes the work to be created;]

[(dd) “broadcast” means communication to the public—

3

(i)

by any means of wireless diffusion, whether in any one or more of the forms of signs, sounds or
visual images; or

(ii) by wire,
and includes a re-broadcast;]
(e) “calendar year” means the year commencing on the 1st day of January;
[(f) “cinematograph film” means any work of visual recording 5[***] and includes a sound recording

4

accompanying such visual recording and “cinematograph” shall be construed as including any work
produced by any process analogous to cinematography including video films;]
[(fa) “commercial rental” does not include the rental, lease or lending of a lawfully acquired copy of a computer

6

programme, sound recording, visual recording or cinematograph film for non-profit purposes by a nonprofit library or non-profit educational institution;
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, a “non-profit library or non-profit educational institution”
means a library or educational institution which receives grants from the Government or exempted from
payment of tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961).]
1 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “architectural work of art” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
2 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2,

for sub-clauses (v) and (vi) (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).

3 Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
4 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for clause (f) (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
5 The words “on any medium produced through a process from which a moving image may be produced by any means” omitted by Act 27

of 2012, s. 2(i) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
6 Ins. by s. 2(ii), ibid. (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

[(ff) “communication to the public” means making any work or performance available for being seen or heard or

1

otherwise enjoyed by the public directly or by any means of display or diffusion other than by issuing
physical copies of it, whether simultaneously or at places and times chosen individually, regardless of
whether any member of the public actually sees, hears or otherwise enjoys the work or performance so
made available.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, communication through satellite or cable or any other means
of simultaneous communication to more than one household or place of residence including residential
rooms of any hotel or hostel shall be deemed to be communication to the public;]
(ffa) “composer”, in relation to a musical work, means the person who composes the music regardless of whether
he records it in any form of graphical notation;
(ffb) “computer” includes any electronic or similar device having information processing capabilities;
(ffc) “computer programme” means a set of instructions expressed in words, codes, schemes or in any other form,
including a machine readable medium, capable of causing a computer to perform a particular task or
achieve a particular result;
(ffd) “copyright society” means a society registered under sub-section (3) of section 33;]
(g) “delivery”, in relation to a lecture, includes delivery by means of any mechanical instrument or by
2

[broadcast];

(h) “dramatic work” includes any piece for recitation, choreographic work or entertainment in dumb show, the
scenic arrangement or acting, form of which is fixed in writing or otherwise but does not include a
cinematograph film;
[(hh) “duplicating equipment” means any mechanical contrivance or device used or intended to be used for

3

making copies of any work;]
(i)

“engravings” include etchings, lithographs, wood-cuts, prints and other similar works, not being
photographs;

(j) “exclusive licence” means a licence which confers on the licensee or on the licensee and persons authorised
by him, to the exclusion of all other persons (including the owner of the copyright) any right
comprised in the copyright in a work, and “exclusive licensee” shall be construed accordingly;
(k) “Government work” means a work which is made or published by or under the direction or control of—
(i) the Government or any department of the Government;
(ii) any Legislature in India;
(iii) any court, tribunal or other judicial authority in India;

1 Subs.

by Act 27 of 2012, s. 2(iii), , for clause (ff) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

2 Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 2, for “radio-diffusion” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
3 Ins. by Act 65 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-10-1984).

[(l) “Indian work” means a literary, dramatic or musical work,—

1

(i) the author of which is a citizen of India; or
(ii) which is first published in India; or
(iii) the author of which, in the case of an unpublished work, is, at the time of the making of the work, a
citizen of India;]
[(m) “infringing copy” means—

2

(i) in relation to a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, a reproduction thereof otherwise than in the
form of a cinematographic film;
(ii) in relation to a cinematographic film, a copy of the film made on any medium by any means;
(iii) in relation to a sound recording, any other recording embodying the same sound recording, made by any
means;
(iv) in relation to a programme or performance in which such a broadcast reproduction right or a
performer’s right subsists under the provisions of this Act, the sound recording or a cinematographic
film of such programme or performance,
if such reproduction, copy or sound recording is made or imported in contravention of the provisions of
this Act;]
(n) “lecture” includes address, speech and sermon;
[(o) “literary work” includes computer programmes, tables and compilations including computer

3

4

[databases];]

[(p) “musical work” means a work consisting of music and includes any graphical notation of such work but

3

does not include any words or any action intended to be sung, spoken or performed with the music;]
[(q) “performance”, in relation to performer’s right, means any visual or acoustic presentation made live by

3

one or more performers;]
[(qq) “performer” includes an actor, singer, musician, dancer, acrobat, juggler, conjurer, snake charmer, a person

3

delivering a lecture or any other person who makes a performance;]
5

[Provided that in a cinematograph film a person whose performance is casual or incidental in nature and,

in the normal course of the practice of the industry, is not acknowledged anywhere including in the credits
of the film shall not be treated as a performer except for the purpose of clause (b) of Section 38B;]
6

[***]

(s) “photograph” includes photo-lithograph and any work produced by any process analogous to photography
1 Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 3, for clause (l) (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
2 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for clause (m) (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
3 Subs. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
4 Subs. by Act 49 of 1999, s. 2, for “data basis” (w.e.f. 15-1-2000).
5 Ins. By Act 27 of 2012, sec. 2(iv) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012, vide S.O. 1393(E), dated 20th June, 2012)
6 Omitted clause (r) by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).

but does not include any part of a cinematograph film;
(t)

“plate” includes any stereotype or other plate, stone, block, mould, matrix, transfer, negative,
1

[duplicating equipment] or other device used or intended to be used for printing or reproducing copies of

any work, and any matrix or other appliance by which 2[sound recording] for the acoustic presentation of the
work are or are intended to be made;
(u) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
3

[(uu) “producer”, in relation to a cinematograph film or sound recording, means a person who takes the initiative
and responsibility for making the work;]

4

[***]

5

[***]
6

7

[(x) “reprography” means the making of copies of a work, by photocopying or similar means;

[(xa) “Right Management Information” means,—
(a) the title or other information identifying the work or performance;
(b) the name of the author or performer;
(c) the name and address of the owner of rights;
(d) terms and conditions regarding the use of the rights; and
(e) any number or code that represents the information referred to in sub-clauses (a) to (d),
but does not include any device or procedure intended to identify the user.]
(xx) “sound recording” means a recording of sounds from which such sounds may be produced regardless of the
medium on which such recording is made or the method by which the sounds are produced;]

8

[(xxa) “visual recording” means the recording in any medium, by any method including the storing of it by any
electronic means, of moving images or of the representations thereof, from which they can be perceived,
reproduced or communicated by any method.]
(y) “work” means any of the following works, namely:—
(i) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work;
(ii) a cinematograph film;
(iii) a 2[sound recording];
(z) “work of joint authorship” means a work produced by the collaboration of two or more authors in which the
contribution of one author is not distinct from the contribution of the other author or authors;

1 Ins. by Act 65 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-10-1984).
2 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
3 Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (10-5-1995).
4 Omitted clause (v) by Act 23 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
5 Omitted clause (w) by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
6 Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause (x) (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
7 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 2(v) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
8 Ins. by s. 2(vi), ibid (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

(za) “work of sculpture” includes casts and models.
[3. Meaning of publication.— For the purposes of this Act, “publication” means making a work available

1

to the public by issue of copies or by communicating the work to the public.]
4. When work not deemed to be published or performed in public.— Except in relation to infringement
of copyright, a work shall not be deemed to be published or performed in public, if published, or performed in
public, without the licence of the owner of the copyright.
5. When work deemed to be first published in India.— For the purposes of this Act, a work published in
India shall be deemed to be first published in India, notwithstanding that it has been published simultaneously in
some other country, unless such other country provides a shorter term of copyright for such work; and a work
shall be deemed to be published simultaneously in India and in another country if the time between the
publication in India and the publication in such other country does not exceed thirty days or such other period as
the Central Government may, in relation to any specified country, determine.
2

[6. Certain disputes to be decided by 3[Appellate Board].— If any question arises—
(a)

whether a work has been published or as to the date on which a work was published for the
purposes of Chapter V, or

(b)

whether the term of copyright for any work is shorter in any other country than that provided in
respect of that work under this Act,

it shall be referred to the 4[Appellate Board] constituted under section 11 whose decision thereon shall be final:
Provided that if in the opinion of the 4[Appellate Board], the issue of copies or communication to the public
referred to in section 3 was of an insignificant nature, it shall not be deemed to be publication for the purposes of
that section.]
7. Nationality of author where the making of unpublished work is extended over considerable
period.— Where, in the case of an unpublished work, the making of the work is extended over a considerable
period, the author of the work shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be a citizen of, or domiciled in,
that country of which he was a citizen or wherein he was domiciled during any substantial part of that period.
8. Domicile of corporations.— For the purposes of this Act, a body corporate shall be deemed to be
domiciled in India if it is incorporated under any law in force in India.
CHAPTER II
COPYRIGHT OFFICE AND 3[APPELLATE BOARD]
9. Copyright Office.—(1) There shall be established for the purposes of this Act an office to be called the
Copyright Office.
(2) The Copyright Office shall be under the immediate control of the Registrar of Copyrights who shall act
1 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 3, for section 3 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
2 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 4, for section 6 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
3 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

under the superintendence and direction of the Central Government.
(3) There shall be a seal for the Copyright Office.
10. Registrar and Deputy Registrar of Copyrights.—(1) The Central Government shall appoint a Registrar
of Copyrights and may appoint one or more Deputy Registrars of Copyrights.
(2) A Deputy Registrar of Copyrights shall discharge under the superintendence and direction of the
Registrar of Copyrights such functions of the Registrar under this Act as the Registrar may, from time to time,
assign to him; and any reference in this Act to the Registrar of Copyrights shall include a reference to a Deputy
Registrar of Copyrights when so discharging any such functions.
1

[11. Appellate Board.—(1) The Appellate Board established under section 83 of the Trade Marks Act,

1999 (47 of 1999) shall, on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017
(7 of 2017), be the Appellate Board for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Board shall exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.]
12. Powers and procedure of 2[Appellate Board].— (1) The 1[Appellate Board] shall, subject to any rules
that may be made under this Act, have power to regulate its own procedure, including the fixing of places and
times of its sittings:
Provided that the 1[Appellate Board] shall ordinarily hear any proceeding instituted before it under this Act
within the zone in which, at the time of the institution of the proceeding, the person instituting the proceeding
actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.
Explanation.— In this sub-section “zone” means a zone specified in section 15 of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956).
(2) The 1[Appellate Board] may exercise and discharge its powers and functions through Benches constituted
by the Chairman of the 1[Appellate Board] from amongst its 3[members]:
4

[Provided that, if the Chairman is of opinion that any matter of importance is required to be heard by a
larger bench, he may refer the matter to a special bench consisting of five members.]
5
[***]
(5) No member of the 2[Appellate Board] shall take part in any proceedings before the Board in respect of
any matter in which he has a personal interest.
(6) No act done or proceeding taken by the 2[Appellate Board] under this Act shall be questioned on the
ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board.
(7) The 2[Appellate Board] shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 6[sections 345 and 346 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973] and all proceedings before the Board shall be deemed to be judicial
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (c), for s. 11(w.e.f. 26-5-2017)
2 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
3 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 4, for “members, each Bench consisting of not less than three members” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
4 Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 6 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
5 Sub-section (3) and (4) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (d) (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
6 Subs.

1984).

by Act 23 of 1983, s. 6, for “sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)” (w.e.f. 9-8-

proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
CHAPTER III
COPYRIGHT
13. Works in which copyright subsists.— (1) Subject to the provisions of this section and the other
provisions of this Act, copyright shall subsist throughout India in the following classes of works, that is to say,—
(a) original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works;
(b) cinematograph films; and
(c) 1[sound recording].
(2) Copyright shall not subsist in any work specified in sub-section (1), other than a work to which the
provisions of section 40 or section 41 apply, unless,—
(i) in the case of a published work, the work is first published in India, or where the work is first
published outside India, the author is at the date of such publication, or in a case where the author
was dead at that date, was at the time of his death, a citizen of India;
(ii) in the case of an unpublished work other than a 2[work of architecture], the author is at the date of the
making of the work a citizen of India or domiciled in India; and
(iii) in the case of 2[work of architecture], the work is located in India.
Explanation.— In the case of a work of joint authorship, the conditions conferring copyright specified in this
sub-section shall be satisfied by all the authors of the work.
(3) Copyright shall not subsist—
(a) in any cinematograph film if a substantial part of the film is an infringement of the copyright in
any other work;
(b) in any 1[sound recording] made in respect of a literary, dramatic or musical work, if in making
the 1[sound recording], copyright in such work has been infringed.
(4) The copyright in a cinematograph film or a 1 [sound recording] shall not affect the separate copyright
in any work in respect of which or a substantial part of which, the film, or, as the case may be,
the 1 [sound recording] is made.
(5) In the case of 2[work of architecture], copyright shall subsist only in the artistic character and design
and shall not extend to processes or methods of construction.
[14. Meaning of Copyright.— For the purposes of this Act, “copyright” means the exclusive right subject

3

to the provisions of this Act, to do or authorise the doing of any of the following acts in respect of a work or any
substantial part thereof, namely:—
(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, not being a computer programme,—
1 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
2 Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “architectural work of art” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
3 Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 14 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).

(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including the storing of it in any medium by electronic
means;
(ii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in circulation;
(iii) to perform the work in public, or communicate it to the public;
(iv) to make any cinematograph film or sound recording in respect of the work;
(v) to make any translation of the work;
(vi) to make any adaptation of the work;
(vii) to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the work, any of the acts specified in relation to
the work in sub-clauses (i) to (vi);
(b) in the case of a computer programme,—
(i) to do any of the acts specified in clause (a);
1

[(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for commercial rental any copy of the computer
programme:
Provided that such commercial rental does not apply in respect of computer programmes where the
programme itself is not the essential object of the rental.]

(c) in the case of an artistic work,—
2

[(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including—
(A) the storing of it in any medium by electronic or other means; or
(B) depiction in three-dimensions of a two-dimensional work; or
(C) depiction in two-dimensions of a three-dimensional work;]

(ii) to communicate the work to the public;
(iii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in circulation;
(iv) to include the work in any cinematograph film;
(v) to make any adaptation of the work;
(vi) to do in relation to adaptation of the work any of the acts specified in relation to the work in sub-clauses
(i) to (iv);
(d) in the case of a cinematograph film,—
3

[(i) to make a copy of the film, including—
(A) a photograph of any image forming part thereof; or
(B) storing of it in any medium by electronic or other means;]

4

[(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for such rental, any copy of the film;]

1 Subs. by Act 49 of 1999, s. 3, for sub-clause (ii) (w.e.f. 15-1-2000).
2 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 5(i), for sub-clause (i) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
3 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012,s. 5(ii)(a), for sub-clause (i) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012)
4 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012,s. 5(ii)(b), for sub-clause (ii) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012)

(iii) to communicate the film to the public;
(e) in the case of a sound recording,—
(i) to make any other sound recording embodying it 1[including storing of it in any medium by
electronic or other means];
2

[(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for such rental, any copy of the sound
recording;]
(iii) to communicate the sound recording to the public.

15. Special provision regarding Copyright in designs registered or capable of being registered under
the 3[***] 4[Designs Act, 2000 (16 of 2000)].— (1) Copyright shall not subsist under this Act in any
design which is registered under the 3[***] 4[Designs Act, 2000 (16 of 2000)].
(2) Copyright in any design, which is capable of being registered under the 3[***] 4[Designs Act, 2000 (16 of
2000)] but which has not been so registered, shall cease as soon as any article to which the design has been
applied has been reproduced more than fifty times by an industrial process by the owner of the copyright or, with
his licence, by any other person.
16. No copyright except as provided in this Act.— No person shall be entitled to copyright or any similar
right in any work, whether published or unpublished, otherwise than under and in accordance with the provisions
of this Act or of any other law for the time being in force, but nothing in this section shall be construed as
abrogating any right or jurisdiction to restrain a breach of trust or confidence.
CHAPTER IV
OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHT AND RIGHTS OF THE OWNER
17. First owner of copyright.— Subject to the provisions of this Act, the author of a work shall be the first
owner of the copyright therein:
Provided that—
(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or artistic work made by the author in the course of his
employment by the proprietor of a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical under a contract of
service or apprenticeship, for the purpose of publication in a newspaper, magazine or similar
periodical, the said proprietor shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be the first
owner of the copyright in the work in so far as the copyright relates to the publication of the work
in any newspaper, magazine or similar periodical, or to the reproduction of the work for the
purpose of its being so published, but in all other respects the author shall be the first owner of the
copyright in the work;
1 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 5(iii)(a), (w.e.f. 21-6-2012)
2 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 5(iii)(b), for sub-clause (2) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012)
3 The words “Indian Patents and” omitted by Act 23 of 1983, s. 7 (w.e.f. 9-8-1984)
4 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 6, for “Designs Act, 1911 (2 of 1911)” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012)

(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), in the case of a photograph taken, or a painting or portrait
drawn, or an engraving or a cinematograph film made, for valuable consideration at the instance of
any person, such person shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be the first owner of
the copyright therein;
(c) in the case of a work made in the course of the author’s employment under a contract of service or
apprenticeship, to which clause (a) or clause (b) does not apply, the employer shall, in the absence
of any agreement to the contrary, be the first owner of the copyright therein;
1

[(cc) in the case of any address or speech delivered in public, the person who has delivered such address
or speech or if such person has delivered such address or speech on behalf of any other person, such
other person shall be the first owner of the copyright therein notwithstanding that the person who
delivers such address or speech, or, as the case may be, the person on whose behalf such address or
speech is delivered, is employed by any other person who arranges such address or speech or on
whose behalf or premises such address or speech is delivered;]
(d) in the case of a Government work, Government shall, in the absence of any agreement to the
contrary, be the first owner of the copyright therein;

2

[(dd) in the case of a work made or first published by or under the direction or control of any public
undertaking, such public undertaking shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be the
first owner of the copyright therein.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause and section 28A, “public undertaking” means—
(i) an undertaking owned or controlled by Government; or
(ii) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);or
(iii) a body corporate established by or under any Central, Provincial or State Act;]
(e) in the case of a work to which the provisions of section 41 apply, the international organization
concerned shall be the first owner of the copyright therein.

3

[Provided that in case of any work incorporated in a cinematograph work, nothing contained in clauses (b) and

(c) shall affect the right of the author in the work referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 13.]
18. Assignment of copyright.— (1) The owner of the copyright in an existing work or the prospective
owner of the copyright in a future work may assign to any person the copyright either wholly or partially and
either generally or subject to limitations and either for the whole term of the copyright or any part thereof:
Provided that in the case of the assignment of copyright in any future work, the assignment shall take effect
only when the work comes into existence.

1 Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 8(a) (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
2 Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 8(b) (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
3 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 7 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

1

[Provided further that no such assignment shall be applied to any medium or mode of exploitation of the

work which did not exist or was not in commercial use at the time when the assignment was made, unless the
assignment specifically referred to such medium or mode of exploitation of the work:
Provided also that the author of the literary or musical work included in a cinematograph film shall not assign
or waive the right to receive royalties to be shared on an equal basis with the assignee of copyright for the
utilization of such work in any form other than for the communication to the public of the work along with the
cinematograph film in a cinema hall, except to the legal heirs of the authors or to a copyright society for collection
and distribution and any agreement to contrary shall be void:
Provided also that the author of the literary or musical work included in the sound recording but not forming
part of any cinematograph film shall not assign or waive the right to receive royalties to be shared on an equal
basis with the assignee of copyright for any utilization of such work except to the legal heirs of the authors or to a
collecting society for collection and distribution and any assignment to the contrary shall be void.]
(2) Where the assignee of a copyright becomes entitled to any right comprised in the copyright, the assignee
as respects the rights so assigned, and the assignor as respects the rights not assigned, shall be treated for the
purposes of this Act as the owner of copyright and the provisions of this Act shall have effect accordingly.
(3) In this section, the expression “assignee” as respects the assignment of the copyright in any future work
includes the legal representatives of the assignee, if the assignee dies before the work comes into existence.
19. Mode of assignment.— 2[(1)] No assignment of the copyright in any work shall be valid unless it
is in writing signed by the assignor or by his duly authorised agent.
3

[(2) The assignment of copyright in any work shall identify such work, and shall specify the rights assigned

and the duration and territorial extent of such assignment.
(3) The assignment of copyright in any work shall also specify the amount of 4[royalty and any other
consideration payable], to the author or his legal heirs during the currency of the assignment and the assignment
shall be subject to revision, extension or termination on terms mutually agreed upon by the parties.
(4) Where the assignee does not exercise the rights assigned to him under any of the other sub-sections of
this section within a period of one year from the date of assignment, the assignment in respect of such rights shall
be deemed to have lapsed after the expiry of the said period unless otherwise specified in the assignment.
(5) If the period of assignment is not stated, it shall be deemed to be five years from the date of assignment.
(6) If the territorial extent of assignment of the rights is not specified, it shall be presumed to extend within
India.
(7) Nothing in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) shall
1 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012)
2 Section 19 re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 23 of 1983, s. 9 (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
3 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 8, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
4 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 9(i), for “royalty payable, if any” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

be applicable to assignments made before the coming into force of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994 (38 of
1994)].
1

[(8) The assignment of copyright in any work contrary to the terms and conditions of the rights already

assigned to a copyright society in which the author of the work is a member shall be void.]
1

[(9) No assignment of copyright in any work to make a cinematograph film shall affect the right of the

author of the work to claim an equal share of royalties and consideration payable in case of utilisation of the work
in any form other than for the communication to the public of the work, along with the cinematograph film in a
cinema hall.]
1

[(10) No assignment of the copyright in any work to make a sound recording which does not form part of

any cinematograph film shall affect the right of the author of the work to claim an equal share of royalties and
consideration payable for any utilization of such work in any form.]
2

[19A. Disputes with respect to assignment of copyright.— (1) If an assignee fails to make sufficient

exercise of the rights assigned to him, and such failure is not attributable to any act or omission of the assignor,
then, the 3[Appellate Board] may, on receipt of a complaint from the assignor and after holding such inquiry as it
may deem necessary, revoke such assignment.
(2) If any dispute arises with respect to the assignment of any copyright, the 3[Appellate Board] may, on
receipt of a complaint from the aggrieved party and after holding such inquiry as it considers necessary, pass such
order as it may deem fit including an order for the recovery of any royalty payable:
Provided that the 3[Appellate Board] shall not pass any order under this sub-section to revoke the assignment
unless it is satisfied that the terms of assignment are harsh to the assignor in case the assignor is also the author:
4

[Provided further that, pending the disposal of an application for revocation of assignment under this sub-

section, the 3[Appellate Board] may pass such order, as it deems fit regarding implementation of the terms and
conditions of assignment including any consideration to be paid for the enjoyment of the rights assigned:
Provided also that] no order of revocation of assignment under this sub-section, shall be made within a period
of five years from the date of such assignment.]
5

[(3) Every complaint received under sub-section (2) shall be dealt with by the 3[Appellate Board] as far as

possible and efforts shall be made to pass the final order in the matter within a period of six months from the date
of receipt of the complaint and any delay in compliance of the same, the 3[Appellate Board] shall record the
reasons thereof.]
20. Transmission of copyright in manuscript by testamentary disposition.— Where under a bequest a
person is entitled to the manuscript of a literary, dramatic or musical work, or to an artistic work, and the work
1 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 9(ii), (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 9, for section 19A (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
3 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
4 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 10(i), for “Provided further that” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
5 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 10(ii) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

was not published before the death of the testator, the bequest shall, unless the contrary intention is indicated in
the testator’s Will or any codicil thereto, be construed as including the copyright in the work in so far as the
testator was the owner of the copyright immediately before his death.
Explanation.— In this section, the expression “manuscript” means the original document embodying the
work, whether written by hand or not.
21. Right of author to relinquish copyright.— (1) The author of a work may relinquish all or any of the
rights comprised in the copyright in the work by giving notice in the prescribed form to 1[the Registrar of
Copyrights or by way of public notice] and thereupon such rights shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section
(3), cease to exist from the date of the notice.
(2) On receipt of a notice under sub-section (1), the Registrar of Copyrights shall cause it to be published in
the Official Gazette and in such other manner as he may deem fit.
2

[(2A) The Registrar of Copyright shall, within fourteen days from the publication of the notice in the

Official Gazette, post the notice on the official website of the Copyright Office so as to remain in the public
domain for a period of not less than three years.]
(3) The relinquishment of all or any of the rights comprised in the copyright in a work shall not affect any
rights subsisting in favour of any person on the date of the notice referred to in sub-section (1).
CHAPTER V
TERM OF COPYRIGHT
22. Term of copyright in published literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works.— Except as
otherwise hereinafter provided, copyright shall subsist in any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work 3[***]
published within the lifetime of the author until 4[sixty years] from the beginning of the calendar year next
following the year in which the author dies.
Explanation.— In this section the reference to the author shall, in the case of a work of joint authorship, be
construed as a reference to the author who dies last.
23. Term of copyright in anonymous and pseudonymous works.— (1) In the case of literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work (other than a photograph), which is published anonymously or pseudonymously,
copyright shall subsist until 5[sixty years] from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in
which the work is first published:
Provided that where the identity of the author is disclosed before the expiry of the said period, copyright shall

1 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 11(i), for “the Registrar of Copyright” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Ins. by s. 11(ii), ibid. (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
3 The words “(other than a photograph)” omitted by Act 27 of 2012 s. 12, (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
4 Subs. by Act 13 of 1992, s. 2, for “fifty years” (w.e.f. 28-10-1991).
5 Subs. by Act 13 of 1992, s. 2, for “fifty years” (w.e.f. 28-10-1991).

subsist until 1[sixty years] from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the author
dies.
(2) In sub-section (1), references to the author shall, in the case of an anonymous work of joint authorship, be
construed,—
(a) where the identity of one of the authors is disclosed, as references to that author;
(b) where the identity of more authors than one is disclosed, as references to the author who dies last
from amongst such authors.
(3) In sub-section (1), references to the author shall, in the case of a pseudonyms work of joint authorship, be
construed,—
(a) where the names of one or more (but not all) of the authors are pseudonyms and his or their identity
is not disclosed, as references to the author whose name is not a pseudonym, or, if the names of two
or more of the authors are not pseudonyms, as references to such of those authors who dies last;
(b) where the names of one or more (but not all) of the authors are pseudonyms and the identity of one
or more of them is disclosed, as references to the author who dies last from amongst the authors
whose names are not pseudonyms and the authors whose names are pseudonyms and are disclosed;
and
(c) where the names of all the authors are pseudonyms and the identity of one of them is disclosed, as
references to the author whose identity is disclosed or if the identity of two or more of such authors
is disclosed, as references to such of those authors who dies last.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the identity of an author shall be deemed to have been
disclosed, if either the identity of the author is disclosed publicly by both the author and the publisher or is
otherwise established to the satisfaction of the 2[Appellate Board] by that author.
24. Term of copyright in posthumous work.— (1) In the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work or an
engraving, in which copyright subsists at the date of the death of the author or, in the case of any such work of
joint authorship, at or immediately before the date of the death of the author who dies last, but which, or any
adaptation of which, has not been published before that date, copyright shall subsist until 1[sixty years] from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the work is first published or, where an adaptation
of the work is published in any earlier year, from the beginning of the calendar year next following that year.
(2) For the purposes of this section a literary, dramatic or musical work or an adaptation of any such work
shall be deemed to have been published, if it has been performed in public or if any 3[sound recording] made in
respect of the work have been sold to the public or have been offered for sale to the public.

1 Subs. by Act 13 of 1992, s. 2, for “fifty years” (w.e.f. 28-10-1991).
2 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
3 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).

[25. Term of copyright in photographs. — Omitted by the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012 (27 of

1

2012), s. 13 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
26. Term of copyright in cinematograph films.— In the case of a cinematograph film, copyright shall
subsist until 2[sixty years] from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the film is
published.
27. Term of copyright in sound recording.— In the case of a 3[sound recording] copyright shall subsist
until 2[sixty years] from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the 3[sound
recording] is published.
28. Term of copyright in Government works.— In the case of a Government work, where Government is
the first owner of the copyright therein, copyright shall subsist until 2[sixty years] from the beginning of the
calendar year next following the year in which the work is first published.
4

[28A. Term of copyright in works of public undertakings.— In the case of a work, where a public

undertaking is the first owner of the copyright therein, copyright shall subsist until 2[sixty years] from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the work is first published.]
29. Term of copyright in works of international organisations.— In the case of a work of an international
organisation to which the provisions of section 41 apply, copyright shall subsist until 2[sixty years] from the
beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the work is first published.
CHAPTER VI
LICENCES
30. Licences by owners of copyright.— The owner of the copyright in any existing work or the prospective
owner of the copyright in any future work may grant any interest in the right by licence in 5[writing by him] or by
his duly authorised agent:
Provided that in the case of a licence relating to copyright in any future work, the licence shall take effect
only when the work comes into existence.
Explanation.— Where a person to whom a licence relating to copyright in any future work is granted under
this section dies before the work comes into existence, his legal representatives shall, in the absence of any
provision to the contrary in the licence, be entitled to the benefit of the licence.
6

[30A. Application of 7[section 19].— The provisions of 7[sections 19] shall, with any necessary adaptations

and modifications, apply in relation to a licence under section 30 as they apply in relation to assignment of
1 Omitted by Act 27 of 2012 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Subs. by Act 13 of 1992, s. 2, for “fifty years” (w.e.f. 28-10-1991).
3 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
4 Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 11 (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
5 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 14, for “writing signed by him” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
6 Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 10 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
7 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 15, for “section 19 and 19A” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

copyright in a work.]
31. Compulsory licence in works withheld from public.— (1) If at any time during the term of copyright
in 1[any work] which has been published or performed in public, a complaint is made to the 2[Appellate Board]
that the owner of copyright in the work—
(a) has refused to republish or allow the republication of the work or has refused to allow the performance in
public of the work, and by reason of such refusal the work is withheld from the public; or
(b) has refused to allow communication to the public by 3[broadcast] of such work or in the case of a 4[sound
recording] the work recorded in such 4[sound recording], on terms which the complainant considers
reasonable;
the 2[Appellate Board], after giving to the owner of the copyright in the work a reasonable opportunity of being
heard and after holding such inquiry as it may deem necessary, may, if it is satisfied that the grounds for such
refusal are not reasonable, direct the Registrar of Copyrights to grant to the complainant a licence to republish the
work, perform the work in public or communicate the work to the public by 3[broadcast], as the case may be,
subject to payment to the owner of the copyright of such compensation and subject to such other terms and
conditions as the 2[Appellate Board] may determine; and thereupon the Registrar of Copyrights shall grant the
5
[licence to such person or persons who, in the opinion of the 2[Appellate Board], is or are qualified to do so] in
accordance with the directions of the 2[Appellate Board], on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
6
[***]
7
[***]
8
[31A. Compulsory licence in unpublished 9[or published works].— 10[(1) Where, in the case of any
unpublished work or any work published or communicated to the public and the work is withheld from the public
in India, the author is dead or unknown or cannot be traced, or the owner of the copyright in such work cannot be
found, any person may apply to the 2[Appellate Board] for a licence to publish or communicate to the public such
work or a translation thereof in any language.]
(2) Before making an application under sub-section (1), the applicant shall publish his proposal in one issue
of a daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the country and where the
application is for the publication of a translation in any language, also in one issue of any daily newspaper in that
language.
(3) Every such application shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied with a
copy of the advertisement issued under sub-section (2) and such fee as may be prescribed.
1 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 16(i)(a), for “any Indian work” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017)
3 Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 2, for “radio-diffusion” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
4 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
5 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 16(i)(b), for “licence to the complainant” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
6 The Explanation omitted by s. 16(i)(c), ibid. (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
7 Sub-section (2) omitted by Act 27 of 2012, s. 16(ii) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
8 Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 12 (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
9 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 17(i), for “Indian works” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
10 Subs. by s. 17(ii), ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

(4) Where an application is made to the 1[Appellate Board] under this section, it may, after holding such
inquiry as may be prescribed, direct the Registrar of Copyrights to grant to the applicant a licence to publish the
work or a translation thereof in the language mentioned in the application subject to the payment of such royalty
and subject to such other terms and conditions as the 1[Appellate Board] may determine, and thereupon the
Registrar of Copyrights shall grant the licence to the applicant in accordance with the direction of the 1[Appellate
Board].
(5) Where a licence is granted under this section, the Registrar of Copyrights may, by order, direct the
applicant to deposit the amount of the royalty determined by the 1[Appellate Board] in the public account of India
or in any other account specified by the 1[Appellate Board] so as to enable the owner of the copyright or, as the
case may be, his heirs, executors or the legal representatives to claim such royalty at any time.
(6) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, in the case of a work referred to in subsection (1), if the original author is dead, the Central Government may, if it considers that the publication of the
work is desirable in the national interest, require the heirs, executors or legal representatives of the author to
publish such work within such period as may be specified by it.
(7) Where any work is not published within the period specified by the Central Government under subsection (6), the 1[Appellate Board] may, on an application made by any person for permission to publish the work
and after hearing the parties concerned, permit such publication on payment of such royalty as the 1[Appellate
Board] may, in the circumstances of such case, determine in the prescribed manner.]
2

[31B. Compulsory licence for benefit of disabled.— (1) Any person working for the benefit of persons

with disability on a profit basis or for business may apply to the 1[Appellate Board], in such form and manner and
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed, for a compulsory licence to publish any work in which copyright
subsists for the benefit of such persons, in a case to which clause (zb) of sub-section (1) of section 52 does not
apply and the 1[Appellate Board] shall dispose of such application as expeditiously as possible and endeavour
shall be made to dispose of such application within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the
application.
(2) The 1[Appellate Board] may, on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), inquire, or direct such
inquiry as it considers necessary to establish the credentials of the applicant and satisfy itself that the application
has been made in good faith.
(3) If the 1[Appellate Board] is satisfied, after giving to the owners of rights in the work a reasonable
opportunity of being heard and after holding such inquiry as it may deem necessary, that a compulsory licence
needs to be issued to make the work available to the disabled, it may direct the Registrar of Copyrights to grant to
the applicant such a licence to publish the work.
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160(a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
2 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 18 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

(4) Every compulsory licence issued under this section shall specify the means and format of publication, the
period during which the compulsory licence may be exercised and, in the case of issue of copies, the number of
copies that may be issued including the rate or royalty:
Provided that where the 1[Appellate Board] has issued such a compulsory licence it may, on a further
application and after giving reasonable opportunity to the owners of rights, extend the period of such compulsory
licence and allow the issue of more copies as it may deem fit.]
2

[31C. Statutory licence for cover versions.— (1) Any person desirous of making a cover version, being

a sound recording in respect of any literary, dramatic or musical work, where sound recordings of that work
have been made by or with the licence or consent of the owner of the right in the work, may do so subject to the
provisions of this section:
Provided that such sound recordings shall be in the same medium as the last recording, unless the
medium of the last recording is no longer in current commercial use.
(2) The person making the sound recordings shall give prior notice of his intention to make the sound
recordings in the manner as may be prescribed, and provide in advance copies of all covers or labels with
which the sound recordings are to be sold, and pay in advance, to the owner of rights in each work
royalties in respect of all copies to be made by him, at the rate fixed by the 1[Appellate Board] in this
behalf:
Provided that such sound recordings shall not be sold or issued in any form of packaging or with any
cover or label which is likely to mislead or confuse the public as to their identity, and in particular shall not
contain the name or depict in any way any performer of an earlier sound recording of the same work or any
cinematograph film in which such sound recording was incorporated and, further, shall state on the cover
that it is a cover version made under this section.
(3) The person making such sound recordings shall not make any alteration in the literary or musical work
which has not been made previously by or with the consent of the owner of rights, or which is not technically
necessary for the purpose of making the sound recordings:
Provided that such sound recordings shall not be made until the expiration of five calendar years after the
end of the year in which the first sound recordings of the work was made.
(4) One royalty in respect of such sound recordings shall be paid for a minimum of fifty thousand
copies of each work during each calendar year in which copies of it are made:
Provided that the 1[Appellate Board] may, by general order, fix a lower minimum in respect of works in a
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
2 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 18 (w.e.f. 21-06-2012)

particular language or dialect having regard to the potential circulation of such works.
(5) The person making such sound recordings shall maintain such registers and books of account in
respect thereof, including full details of existing stock as may be prescribed and shall allow the owner of
rights or his duly authorised agent or representative to inspect all records and books of account relating to such
sound recording:
Provided that if on a complaint brought before the 1[Appellate Board] to the effect that the owner of
rights has not been paid in full for any sound recordings purporting to be made in pursuance of this
section, the 1[Appellate Board] is, prima facie, satisfied that the complaint is genuine, it may pass an order
ex parte directing the person making the sound recording to cease from making further copies and, after
holding such inquiry as it considers necessary, make such further order as it may deem fit, including an order
for payment of royalty.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section “cover version” means a sound recording made in
accordance with this section.]
2

[31D. Statutory licence for broadcasting of literary and musical works and sound recording.— (1)

Any broadcasting organisation desirous of communicating to the public by way of a broadcast or by way of
performance of a literary or musical work and sound recording which has already been published may do so
subject to the provisions of this section.
(2) The broadcasting organisation shall give prior notice, in such manner as may be prescribed, of its
intention to broadcast the work stating the duration and territorial coverage of the broadcast, and shall pay to the
owner of rights in each work royalties in the manner and at the rate fixed by the 1[Appellate Board].
(3) The rates of royalties for radio broadcasting shall be different from television broadcasting and the
1

[Appellate Board] shall fix separate rates for radio broadcasting and television broadcasting.
(4) In fixing the manner and the rate of royalty under sub-section (2), the 1[Appellate Board] may require the

broadcasting organisation to pay an advance to the owners of rights.
(5) The names of the authors and the principal performers of the work shall, except in case of the
broadcasting organisation communicating such work by way of performance, be announced with the broadcast.
(6) No fresh alteration to any literary or musical work, which is not technically necessary for the purpose of
broadcasting, other than shortening the work for convenience of broadcast, shall be made without the consent of
the owners of rights.
(7) The broadcasting organisation shall—
(a) maintain such records and books of account, and render to the owners of rights such reports and
accounts; and
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
2 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 18 (w.e.f. 21-06-2012)

(b) allow the owner of rights or his duly authorised agent or representative to inspect all records and
books of account relating to such broadcast,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(8) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of any licence issued or any agreement entered into
before the commencement of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012.]
32. Licence to produce and publish translations.— (1) Any person may apply to the 1[Appellate Board]
for a licence to produce and publish a translation of a literary or dramatic work in any language 2[after a period
of seven years from the first publication of the work].
3

[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any person may apply to the 1[Appellate

Board] for a licence to produce and publish a translation, in printed or analogous forms of reproduction, of a
literary or dramatic work, other than an Indian work, in any language in general use in India after a period of three
years from the first publication of such work, if such translation is required for the purposes of teaching,
scholarship or research:
Provided that where such translation is in a language not in general use in any developed country, such
application may be made after a period of one year from such publication.]
(2) Every 4[application under this section] shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall state
the proposed retail price of a copy of the translation of the work.
(3) Every applicant for a licence under this section shall, along with his application, deposit with the
Registrar of Copyrights such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) Where an application is made to the 1[Appellate Board] under this section, it may, after holding such
inquiry as may be prescribed, grant to the applicant a licence, not being an exclusive licence, to produce and
publish a translation of the work in the language mentioned in 5[the application—
(i) subject to the condition that the applicant shall pay to the owner of the copyright in the work
royalties in respect of copies of the translation of the work sold to the public, calculated at such rate
as the 1[Appellate Board] may, in the circumstances of each case, determine in the prescribed
manner; and
(ii) where such licence is granted on an application under sub-section (1A), subject also to the condition
that the licence shall not extend to the export of copies of the translation of the work outside India
and every copy of such translation shall contain a notice in the language of such translation that the
copy is available for distribution only in India:
Provided that nothing in clause (ii) shall apply to the export by Government or any authority under the
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
2 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 18 (w.e.f 21-6-2012)
3 Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 13 (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
4 Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “such application” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
5 Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).

Government of copies of such translation in a language other than English, French or Spanish to any country if—
1) such copies are sent to citizens of India residing outside India or to any association of such citizens
outside India; or
2) such copies are meant to be used for purposes of teaching, scholarship or research and not for any
commercial purpose; and
3) in either case, the permission for such export has been given by the Government of that country:]
1

[Provided further that no licence under this section] shall be granted, unless—
(a) a translation of the work in the language mentioned in the application has not been published by the
owner of the copyright in the work or any person authorised by him, 2[within seven years or three
years or one year, as the case may be, of the first publication of the work], or if a translation has been
so published, it has been out of print;
(b) the applicant has proved to the satisfaction of the 3[Appellate Board] that he had requested and had
been denied authorisation by the owner of the copyright to produce and publish such translation, or
that 4[he was, after due diligence on his part, unable to find] the owner of the copyright;
(c) where the applicant was unable to find the owner of the copyright, he had sent a copy of his request
for 5[such authorisation by registered air mail post to the publisher whose name appears from the
work, and in the case of an application for a licence under sub-section (1)], not less than two months
before 6[such application];
7

[(cc) a period of six months in the case of an application under sub-section (1A) (not being an application
under the proviso thereto), or nine months in the case of an application under the proviso to that subsection, has elapsed from the date of making the request under clause (b) of this proviso or where a
copy of the request has been sent under clause (c) of this proviso, from the date of sending of such
copy, and the translation of the work in the language mentioned in the application has not been
published by the owner of the copyright in the work or any person authorised by him within the said
period of six months or nine months, as the case may be;
8

[(ccc) in the case of any application made under sub-section (1A),—
(i) the name of the author and the title of the particular edition of the work proposed to be translated
are printed on all the copies of the translation;
(ii) if the work is composed mainly of illustrations, the provisions of section 32A are also complied

1 Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 13, for “Provided that no such licence” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
2 Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “within seven years of the first publication of the work” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
3 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
4 Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 13,., for “he was unable to find” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
5 Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “such authorisation to the publisher whose name appears from the work” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
6 Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “the application for the licence” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
7 Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
8 Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).

with;]
(d) the 1[Appellate Board] is satisfied that the applicant is competent to produce and publish a correct
translation of the work and possesses the means to pay to the owner of the copyright the royalties
payable to him under this section;
(e) the author has not withdrawn from circulation copies of the work; and
(f) an opportunity of being heard is given, wherever practicable, to the owner of the copyright in the
work.
2

[(5) Any broadcasting authority may apply to the 1[Appellate Board] for a licence to produce and

publish the translation of—
(a) a work referred to in sub-section (1A) and published in printed or analogous forms of
reproduction; or
(b) any text incorporated in audio-visual fixations prepared and published solely for the purpose of
systematic instructional activities,
for broadcasting such translation for the purposes of teaching or for the dissemination of the results of
specialized, technical or scientific research to the experts in any particular field.
3

[(6) The provisions of sub-sections (2) to (4) in so far as they are relatable to an application under

sub-section (1A), shall, with the necessary modifications, apply to the grant of a licence under subsection (5) and such licence shall not also be granted unless—
(a) the translation is made from a work lawfully acquired;
(b) the broadcast is made through the medium of sound and visual recordings;
(c) such recording has been lawfully and exclusively made for the purpose of broadcasting in India
by the applicant or by other broadcasting agency; and
(d) the translation and the broadcasting of such translation are not used for any commercial
purposes.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “developed country” means a country which is not a developing country;
(b) “developing country” means a country which is for the time being regarded as such in
conformity with the practice of the General Assembly of the United Nations;
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
2 Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 13, (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
3 Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s.13(e) (w.e.f 9-8-1984)

(c) “purposes of research” does not include purposes of industrial research, or purposes of
research by bodies corporate (not being bodies corporate owned or controlled by Government)
or other associations or body of persons for commercial purposes;
(d) “purposes of teaching, research or scholarship” includes—
(i) purposes of instructional activity at all levels in educational, institutions, including
Schools, Colleges, Universities and tutorial institutions; and
(ii) purposes of all other types of organised educational activity.]
1

[32A. Licence to reproduce and publish works for certain purposes.— (1) Where, after the

expiration of the relevant period from the date of the first publication of an edition of a literary, scientific or
artistic work,—
(a) the copies of such edition are not made available in India; or
(b) such copies have not been put on sale in India for a period of six months,
to the general public, or in connection with systematic instructional activities at a price reasonably related to
that normally charged in India for comparable works by the owner of the right of reproduction or by any
person authorised by him in this behalf, any person may apply to the 2[Appellate Board] for a licence to
reproduce and publish such work in printed or analogous forms of reproduction at the price at which such
edition is sold or at a lower price for the purposes of systematic instructional activities.
(2) Every such application shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall state the
proposed retail price of a copy of the work to be reproduced.
(3) Every applicant for a licence under this section shall, along with his application, deposit with the
Registrar of Copyrights such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) Where an application is made to the 2 [Appellate Board] under this section, it may, after holding such
inquiry as may be prescribed, grant to the applicant a licence, not being an exclusive licence, to produce
and publish a reproduction of the work mentioned in the application subject to the conditions that,—
(i) the applicant shall pay to the owner of the copyright in the work royalties in respect of copies of
the reproduction of the work sold to the public, calculated at such rate as the 2 [Appellate Board] may, in
the circumstances of each case, determine in the prescribed manner;
(ii) a licence granted under this section shall not extend to the export of copies of the reproduction of
the work outside India and every copy of such reproduction shall contain a notice that the copy is
available for distribution only in India:
Provided that no such licence shall be granted unless—

1 Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s.14 (w.e.f 9-8-1984)
2 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

(a) the applicant has proved to the satisfaction of the 1[Appellate Board] that he had requested and
had been denied authorisation by the owner of the copyright in the work to reproduce and publish
such work or that he was, after due diligence on his part, unable to find such owner;
(b) where the applicant was unable to find the owner of the copyright, he had sent a copy of his
request for such authorisation by registered air-mail post to the publisher whose name appears from the
work not less than three months before the application for the licence;
(c) the 1[Appellate Board] is satisfied that the applicant is competent to reproduce and publish an
accurate reproduction of the work and possesses the means to pay to the owner of the copyright the
royalties payable to him under this section;
(d) the applicant undertakes to reproduce and publish the work at such price as may be fixed by
the 1[Appellate Board], being a price reasonably related to the price normally charged in India for
works of the same standard on the same or similar subjects;
(e) a period of six months in the case of an application for the reproduction and publication of any
work of natural science, physical science, mathematics or technology, or a period of three months
in the case of an application for the reproduction and publication of any other work, has elapsed from
the date of making the request under clause (a), or where a copy of the request has been sent under
clause (b), from the date of sending of a copy, and a reproduction of the work has not been published
by the owner of the copyright in the work or any person authorised by him within the said period of
six months or, three months, as the case may be;
(f) the name of the author and the title of the particular edition of the work proposed to be
reproduced are printed on all the copies of the reproduction;
(g) the author has not withdrawn from circulation copies of the work; and
(h) an opportunity of being heard is given, wherever practicable, to the owner of the copyright in
the work.
(5) No licence to reproduce and publish the translation of a work shall be granted under this section
unless such translation has been published by the owner of the right of translation or any person authorised by
him and the translation is not in a language in general use in India.
(6) The provisions of this section shall also apply to the reproduction and publication, or translation into
a language in general use in India, of any text incorporated in audio-visual fixations prepared and published
solely for the purpose of systematic instructional activities.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “relevant period”, in relation to any work,
means a period of—
(a) seven years from the date of the first publication of that work, where the application is for
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

the reproduction and publication of any work of, or relating to, fiction, poetry, drama,
music or art;
(b) three years from the date of the first publication of that work, where the application is for
the reproduction and publication of any work of, or relating to, natural science, physical
science, mathematics or technology; and
(c) five years from the date of the first publication of that work, in any other case.]
1

[32B. Termination of licences issued under this Chapter.— (1) If, at any time after the granting of a

licence to produce and publish the translation of a work in any language under sub-section (1A) of
section 32 (hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the licensed work), the owner of the copyright in the work
or any person authorised by him publishes a translation of such work in the same language and which is
substantially the same in content at a price reasonably related to the price normally charged in India for the
translation of works of the same standard on the same or similar subject, the licence so granted shall be
terminated:
Provided that no such termination shall take effect until after the expiry of a period of three months from
the date of service of a notice in the prescribed manner on the person holding such licence by the owner of
the right of translation intimating the publication of the translation as aforesaid:
Provided further that copies of the licensed work produced and published by the person holding such
licence before the termination of the licence takes effect may continue to be sold or distributed until the
copies already produced and published are exhausted.
(2) If, at any time after the granting of a licence to produce and publish the reproduction or translation of
any work under section 32A, the owner of the right of reproduction or any person authorised by him sells or
distributes copies of such work or a translation thereof, as the case may be, in the same language and which is
substantially the same in content at a price reasonably related to the price normally charged in India for works
of the same standard on the same or similar subject, the licence so granted shall be terminated:
Provided that no such termination shall take effect until after the expiry of a period of three months from
the date of service of a notice in the prescribed manner on the person holding the licence by the owner of
the right of reproduction intimating the sale or distribution of the copies of the editions of work as aforesaid:
Provided further that any copies already reproduced by the licensee before such termination takes
effect may continue to be sold or distributed until the copies already produced are exhausted.]

1

Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s.14 (w.e.f 9-8-1984)

1

[CHAPTER VII

COPYRIGHT SOCIETIES
33. Registration of Copyright society.— (1) No person or association of persons shall, after coming
into force of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994 (38 of 1994) commence or, carry on the business of
issuing or granting licences in respect of any work in which copyright subsists or in respect of any other rights
conferred by this Act except under or in accordance with the registration granted under sub-section (3):
Provided that an owner of copyright shall, in his individual capacity, continue to have the right to grant
licences in respect of his own works consistent with his obligations as a member of the registered copyright
society:
2

[Provided further that the business of issuing or granting licence in respect of literary, dramatic, musical

and artistic works incorporated in a cinematograph films or sound recordings shall be carried out only through a
copyright society duly registered under this Act:
Provided also] that a performing rights society functioning in accordance with the provisions of section 33 on
the date immediately before the coming into force of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994 (38 of 1994) shall be
deemed to be a copyright society for the purposes of this Chapter and every such society shall get itself
registered within a period of one year from the date of commencement of the Copyright (Amendment) Act,
1994.
(2) Any association of persons who fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed may apply for
permission to do the business specified in sub-section (1) to the Registrar of Copyrights who shall submit the
application to the Central Government.
(3) The Central Government may, having regard to the interests of the authors and other owners of rights
under this Act, the interest and convenience of the public and in particular of the groups of persons who are
most likely to seek licences in respect of the relevant rights and the ability and professional competence
of the applicants, register such association of persons as a copyright society subject to such conditions as
may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government shall not ordinarily register more than one copyright society to do
business in respect of the same class of works.
3

[(3A) The registration granted to a copyright society under sub-section (3) shall be for a period of five

years and may be renewed from time to time before the end of every five years on a request in the
prescribed form and the Central Government may renew the registration after considering the report of
Registrar of Copyrights on the working of the copyright society under section 36:
Provided that the renewal of the registration of a copyright society shall be subject to the continued
1 Chapter VII subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 11, (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
2 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 19 (i), for “Provided further” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012)
3 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 19 (ii) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

collective control of the copyright society being shared with the authors of works in their capacity as
owners of copyright or of the right to receive royalty:
Provided further that every copyright society already registered before the coming into force of the
Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012 (27 of 2012) shall get itself registered under this Chapter within a
period of one year from the date of commencement of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012.]
(4) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a copyright society is being managed in a
manner detrimental to the interests of the 1[authors and other owners of right] concerned, cancel the
registration of such society after such inquiry as may be prescribed.
(5) If the Central Government is of the opinion that in the interest of the 1[authors and other owners of
right] concerned 2[or for non-compliance of sections 33A, sub-section (3) of section 35 and section 36 or
any change carried out in the instrument by which the copyright society is established or incorporated and
registered by the Central Government without prior notice to it], it is necessary so to do, it may, by order, suspend
the registration of such society pending inquiry for such period not exceeding one year as may be specified in
such order under sub-section (4) and that Government shall appoint an administrator to discharge the functions of
the copyright society.
3

[33A. Tariff Scheme by copyright societies.— (1) Every copyright society shall publish its tariff

scheme in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Any person who is aggrieved by the tariff scheme may appeal to the 4[Appellate Board] and the
Board may, if satisfied after holding such inquiry as it may consider necessary, make such orders as may be
required to remove any unreasonable element, anomaly or inconsistency therein:
Provided that the aggrieved person shall pay to the copyright society any fee as may be prescribed that has
fallen due before making an appeal to the 4[Appellate Board] and shall continue to pay such fee until the appeal is
decided, and the Board shall not issue any order staying the collection of such fee pending disposal of the appeal:
Provided further that the 4[Appellate Board] may after hearing the parties fix an interim tariff and
direct the aggrieved parties to make the payment accordingly pending disposal of the appeal.]
34. Administration of rights of owner by copyright society.— (1) Subject to such conditions as may
be prescribed,—
(a) a copyright society

may accept from an

1

[author and other owners

of right] exclusive

authorisation to administer any right in any work by issue of licences or collection of licence fees or both;
and

1 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 19 (iii), for “owners of rights” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Ins.

By Act 27 of 2012, sec. 19(iv), (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

3 Ins. By Act 27 of 2012, sec. 20, (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
4 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

(b) an 1[author and other owners of right] shall have the right to withdraw such authorisation
without prejudice to the rights of the copyright society under any contract.
(2) It shall be competent for a copyright society to enter into agreement with any foreign society or
organisation administering rights corresponding to rights under this Act, to entrust to such foreign society or
organisation the administration in any foreign country of rights administered by the said copyright society
in India, or for administering in India the rights administered in a foreign country by such foreign society or
organisation:
Provided that no such society or organisation shall permit any discrimination in regard to the terms of
licence or the distribution of fees collected between rights in Indian and other works.
(3) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, a copyright society may—
(i) issue licences under section 30 in respect of any rights under this Act;
(ii) collect fees in pursuance of such licences;
(iii) distribute such fees among 1 [author and other owners of right] after making deductions for its
own expenses;
(iv) perform any other functions consistent with the provisions of section 35.
34A. [Payment of remunerations by copyright society.] Rep. by the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012
(27 of 2012), s. 22 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
35. Control over the copyright society by the 2[author and other owners of right].— (1) Every
copyright society shall be subject to the collective control of the 2[author and other owners of right] under this
Act whose rights it administers (not being 2 [author and other owners of right] under this Act administered
by a foreign society or organisation referred to in sub-section (2) of section 34) and shall, in
such manner as may be prescribed,—
(a) obtain the approval of such 2[author and other owners of right] for its procedures of collection and
distribution of fees;
(b) obtain their approval for the utilisation of any amounts collected as fees for any purpose other than
distribution to the 2[author and other owners of right]; and
(c) provide to such owners regular, full and detailed information concerning all its activities, in
relation to the administration of their rights.
(2) All fees distributed among the 2[author and other owners of right] shall, as far as may be, be
1

Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 21, for “owner of rights” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

2 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 23(a), for “owner of rights” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

distributed in proportion to the actual use of their works.
1

[(3) Every copyright society shall have a governing body with such number of persons elected from

among the members of the society consisting of equal number of authors and owners of work for the
purpose of the administration of the society as may be specified.]
1

[(4) All members of copyrights society shall enjoy equal membership rights and there shall be no

discrimination between authors and owners of right in the distribution of royalties.]
36. Submission of returns and reports.— (1) Every copyright society shall submit to the Registrar
of Copyrights such returns as may be prescribed.
(2) Any officer duly authorised by the Central Government in this behalf may call for any report and also
call for any records of any copyright society for the purpose of satisfying himself that the fees collected
by the society in respect of rights administered by it are being utilised or distributed in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
36A. Rights and liabilities of performing rights societies.— Nothing in this Chapter shall affect any
rights or liabilities in any work in connection with a 2[copyright society] which had accrued or were
incurred on or before the day prior to the commencement of 3[the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012 (27
of 2012], or any legal proceedings in respect of any such rights or liabilities pending on that day.]
CHAPTER VIII
4

[RIGHTS OF BROADCASTING ORGANISATION AND OF
PERFORMERS]

5

[37. Broadcast reproduction right.— (1) Every broadcasting organisation shall have a special right to be

known as “broadcast reproduction right” in respect of its broadcasts.
(2) The broadcast reproduction right shall subsist until twenty-five years from the beginning of the
calendar year next following the year in which the broadcast is made.
(3) During the continuance of a broadcast reproduction right in relation to any broadcast, any person who,
without the licence of the owner of the right does any of the following acts of the broadcast or any substantial
part thereof,—
(a) re-broadcast the broadcast; or
(b) causes the broadcast to be heard or seen by the public on payment of any charges; or
1 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 23(b), for “owner of rights” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 24(a), for “performing rights society” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
3 Subs. by s. 24(b), ibid., for “the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994 (38 of 1994)” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
4 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 12, for “RIGHTS OF BROADCASTING AUTHORITIES” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
5 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 13, for

section 37 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).

(c) makes any sound recording or visual recording of the broadcast; or
(d) makes any reproduction of such sound recording or visual recording where such initial
recording was done without licence or, where it was licensed, for any purpose not envisaged by such
licence; or
1

[(e) sells or gives on commercial rental or offer for sale or for such rental, any such sound

recording or visual recording referred to in clause (c) or clause (d)].]
shall, subject to the provision of section 39, be deemed to have infringed the broadcast reproduction right.
[38. Performer’s right.— (1) Where any performer appears or engages in any performance, he shall have

2

a special right to be known as the “performer’s right” in relation to such performance.
(2) The performer’s right shall subsist until 3[fifty years] from the beginning of the calendar year next
following the year in which the performance is made.
4

[***]

5

[38A. Exclusive right of performers.— (1) Without prejudice to the rights conferred on authors, the

performer’s right which is an exclusive right subject to the provisions of this Act to do or authorise for
doing any of the following acts in respect of the performance or any substantial part thereof, namely:—
(a) to make a sound recording or a visual recording of the performance, including—
(i) reproduction of it in any material form including the storing of it in any medium by
electronic or any other means;
(ii) issuance of copies of it to the public not being copies already in circulation;
(iii) communication of it to the public;
(iv) selling or giving it on commercial rental or offer for sale or for commercial rental any copy
of the recording;
(b) to broadcast or communicate the performance to the public except where the performance is
already broadcast.
(2) Once a performer has, by written agreement, consented to the incorporation of his performance in
a cinematograph film he shall not, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, object to the enjoyment by
the producer of the film of the performer’s right in the same film:
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-section, the performer shall be entitled for
1 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 25, for clause (e) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 14, for section 38 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
3 Subs. by 49 of 1999, s. 4, for “twenty-five years” (w.e.f. 15-1-2000).
4 Omitted by Act 27 of 2012, sub-section (3) and sub-section (4) of section 26. (w.e.f. 21-6-2012)
5 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 27, (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

royalties in case of making of the performances for commercial use.]
1

[38B. Moral rights of the performer.— The performer of a performance shall, independently of his

right after assignment, either wholly or partially of his right, have the right,—
(a) to claim to be identified as the performer of his performance except where omission is
dictated by the manner of the use of the performance; and
(b) to restrain or claim damage in respect of any distortion, mutilation or other modification of his
performance that would be prejudicial to his reputation.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified that mere removal of any portion of a
performance for the purpose of editing, or to fit the recording within a limited duration, or any other
modification required for purely technical reasons shall not

be deemed to be prejudicial to the

performer’s reputation.]
[39. Acts not infringing broadcast reproduction right or performer’s right.— No broadcast

2

reproduction right or performer's right shall be deemed to be infringed by—
(a) the making of any sound recording or visual recording for the private use of the person
making such recording, or solely for purposes of bona fide teaching or research; or
(b) the use, consistent with fair dealing, of excerpts of a performance or of a broadcast in the
reporting of current events or for bona fide review, teaching or research; or
(c) such other acts, with any necessary adaptations and modifications, which do not constitute
infringement of copyright under section 52.]
[39A. Certain provisions to apply in case of broadcast reproduction right and performer’s

3

rights. (1)Sections 18, 19, 30, 30A, 33, 33A, 34, 35, 36, 53, 55, 58, 63, 64, 65, 65A, 65B and 66 shall, with
necessary adaptations and modifications, apply in relation to the broadcast reproduction right in any broadcast
and the performer's right in any performance as they apply in relation to copyright in a work:
Provided that where copyright o r performer’s right subsists in respect of any work or performance that
has been broadcast, no licence to reproduce such broadcast, shall be given without the consent of the owner of
right or performer, as the case may be, or both of them:
Provided further that the broadcast reproduction right or performer’s right shall not subsist in any
broadcast or performance if that broadcast or performance is an infringement of the copyright in any
work.
(2) The broadcast reproduction right or the performer’s right shall not affect the separate copyright in any
1 Ins. by s. 27, Act 27 of 2012. (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s.15, for s. 39 (w.e.f 10-5-1995).
3 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 28, for section 39A (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

work in respect of which, the broadcast or the performance, as the case may be, is made.]
CHAPTER IX
INTERNATIONAL COPYRIGHT
40. Power to extend copyright to foreign works.— The Central Government may, by order1
published in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any provisions of this Act shall apply—
(a) to works first published in any territory outside India to which the order relates in like manner as if
they were first published within India;
(b) to unpublished works, or any class thereof, the authors whereof were at the time of the making of
the work, subjects or citizens of a foreign country to which the order relates, in like manner as if the
authors were citizens of India;
(c) in respect of domicile in any territory outside India to which the order relates in like manner as if
such domicile were in India;
(d) to any work of which the author was at the date of the first publication thereof, or, in a case where
the author was dead at that date, was at the time of his death, a subject or citizen of a foreign
country to which the order relates in like manner as if the author was a citizen of India at that date
or time;
and thereupon, subject to the provisions of this Chapter and of the order, this Act shall apply accordingly:
Provided that—
(i) before making an order under this section in respect of any foreign country (other than a
country with which India has entered into a treaty or which is a party to a convention relating
to copyright to which India is also a party), the Central Government shall be satisfied that the
foreign country has made, or has undertaken to make, such provisions, if any, as it appears to
the Central Government expedient to require for the protection in that country of works
entitled to copyright under the provisions of this Act;
(ii) the order may provide that the provisions of this Act shall apply either generally or in relation to
such classes of works or such classes of cases as may be specified in the order;
(iii) the order may provide that the term of copyright in India shall not exceed that conferred by the
law of the country to which the order relates 2[but such a term or copyright shall not exceed the
term of copyright provided under this Act];

1 International Copyright order, 1999 (w.e.f. 6-4-1999)
2 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 29 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

(iv) the order may provide that the enjoyment of the rights conferred by this Act shall be subject to
the accomplishment of such conditions and formalities, if any, as may be prescribed by the order;
(v) in applying the provisions of this Act as to ownership of copyright, the order may make such
exceptions and modifications as appear necessary, having regard to the law of the foreign country;
(vi) the order may provide that this Act or any part thereof shall not apply to works made before the
commencement of the order or that this Act or any part thereof shall not apply to works first
published before the commencement of the order.
1

[40A. Power of Central Government to apply Chapter VIII to broadcasting organisations and

performers in certain other countries.— (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that a foreign country
(other than a country with which India has entered into a treaty or which is a party to a convention relating to
rights of broadcasting organisations and performers to which India is also a party) has made or has undertaken
to make such provisions, if any, as it appears to the Central Government expedient to require, for the protection
in that foreign country, of the rights of broadcasting organizations and performers as is available under this
Act, it may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of Chapter VIII shall apply—
(a) to broadcasting organisation whose headquarters is situated in a country to which the order
relates or, the broadcast was transmitted from a transmitter situated in a country to which the
order relates as if the headquarters of such organisation were situated in India or such broadcast
were made from India;
(b) to performances that took place outside India to which the order relates in like manner as if they
took place in India;
(c) to performances that are incorporated in a sound recording published in a country to which the
order relates as if it were published in India;
(d) to performances not fixed on a sound recording broadcast by a broadcasting organisation the
headquarters of which is located in a country to which the order relates or where the broadcast
is transmitted from a transmitter which is situated in a country to which the order relates as
if the headquarters of such organisation were situated in India or such broadcast were made from
India.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) may provide that—
(i) the provisions of Chapter VIII, shall apply either generally or in relation to such class or
classes of broadcasts or performances or such other class or classes of cases as may be specified in the
order;
1 Ins. by Act 49 of 1999, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15-1-2000).

(ii) the term of the rights of broadcasting organisations and performers in India shall not exceed such
term as is conferred by the law of the country to which the order relates
1

[Provided that it does not exceed the period provided under this Act;]

(iii) the enjoyment of the rights conferred by Chapter VIII shall be subject to the accomplishment of
such conditions and formalities, if any, as may be specified in that order;
(iv) Chapter VIII or any part thereof shall not apply to broadcast and performances made before the
commencement of the order or that Chapter VIII or any part thereof shall not apply to broadcasts and
performances broadcast or performed before the commencement of the order;
(v) in case of ownership of rights of broadcasting organisations and performers, the provisions of
Chapter VIII shall apply with such exceptions and modifications as the Central Government may,
having regard to the law of the foreign country, consider necessary.]
41. Provisions as to works of certain international organisations.— (1) Where—
(a) any work is made or first published by or under the direction or control of any organisation to
which this section applies, and
(b) there would, apart from this section, be no copyright in the work in India at the time of the
making or, as the case may be, of the first publication thereof, and
(c) either—
(i)

the work is published as aforesaid in pursuance of an agreement in that behalf with the
author, being an agreement which does not reserve to the author the copyright, if any, in the
work, or

(ii)

under section 17 any copyright in the work would belong to the organisation;

there shall, by virtue of this section, be copyright in the work throughout India.
(2) Any organisation to which this section applies which at the material time had not the legal
capacity of a body corporate shall have and be deemed at all material times to have had the legal capacity of a
body corporate for the purpose of holding, dealing with, and enforcing copyright and in connection with all
legal proceedings relating to copyright.
(3) The organisations to which this section applies are such organisations as the Central Government may,
by order2 published in the Official Gazette, declare to be organisations of which one or more sovereign
powers or the Government or Governments thereof are members to which it is expedient that this section
shall apply.
1 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 30 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 International Copyright order, 1999 (w.e.f. 6-4-1999)

42. Power to restrict rights in works of foreign authors first published in India.— If it appears to the
Central Government that a foreign country does not give or has not undertaken to give adequate
protection to the works of Indian authors, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official
Gazette, direct that such of the provisions of this Act as confer copyright on works first published in India shall
not apply to works, published after the date specified in the order, the authors whereof are subjects or citizens
of such foreign country and are not domiciled in India, and thereupon those provisions shall not apply to
such works.
1

[42A. Power to restrict rights of foreign broadcasting organisations and performers.— If it

appears to the Central Government that a foreign country does not give or has not undertaken to give adequate
protection to rights of broadcasting organisations or performers, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, direct that such of the provisions of this Act as confer right to broadcasting
organisations or performers, as the case may be, shall not apply to broadcasting organisations or performers
whereof are based or incorporated in such foreign country or are subjects or citizens of such foreign country and
are not incorporated or domiciled in India, and thereupon those provisions shall not apply to such broadcasting
organisations or performers:]
43. Orders under this Chapter to be laid before Parliament.— Every order made by the Central
Government under this Chapter shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before both Houses of
Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications as Parliament may make during the session in which it is
so laid or the session immediately following.
CHAPTER X
REGISTRATION OF COPYRIGHT
44. Register of Copyrights.— There shall be kept at the Copyright Office a register in the prescribed form
to be called the Register of Copyrights in which may be entered the names or titles of works and the names and
addresses of authors, publishers and owners of copyright and such other particulars as may be prescribed.
45. Entries in Register of Copyrights.— (1) The author or publisher of, or the owner of or other person
interested in the copyright in, any work may make an application in the prescribed form accompanied by the
prescribed fee to the Registrar of Copyrights for entering particulars of the work in the Register of Copyrights:
2

[Provided that in respect of an artistic work which is used or is capable of being used in 3[relation to any

goods or services], the application shall include a statement to that effect and shall be accompanied by a
certificate from the Registrar of Trade Marks referred to in 4[section 3 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of
1 Ins. by Act 49 of 1999, s. 6 (w.e.f. 15-1-2000).
2 The proviso added by Act 23 of 1983, s. 16 (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
3 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 31, for “relation to any goods” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
4 Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “section 4 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958)” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

1999)], to the effect that no trade mark identical with or deceptively similar to such artistic work has been
registered under that Act in the name of, or that no application has been made under that Act for such
registration by, any person other than the applicant.]
(2) On receipt of an application in respect of any work under sub-section (1), the Registrar of
Copyrights may, after holding such inquiry as he may deem fit, enter the particulars of the work in the
Register of Copyrights.
46. Indexes.— There shall be also kept at the Copyright Office such indexes of the Register of
Copyrights as may be prescribed.
47. Form and inspection of register.— The Register of Copyrights and indexes thereof kept under this
Act shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection, and any person shall be entitled to take copies of, or
make extracts from, such register or indexes on payment of such fee and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.
48. Register of Copyrights to be prima facie evidence of particulars entered therein.— The
Register of Copyrights shall be prima facie evidence of the particulars entered therein and documents
purporting to be copies of any entries therein, or extracts therefrom, certified by the Registrar of Copyrights
and sealed with the seal of the Copyright Office shall be admissible in evidence in all courts without further
proof or production of the original.
49. Correction of entries in the Register of Copyrights.— The Registrar of Copyrights may, in the
prescribed cases and subject to the prescribed conditions, amend or alter the Register of Copyrights by—
(a) correcting any error in any name, address or particulars; or
(b) correcting any other error which may have arisen therein by accidental slip or omission.
50. Rectification of Register by 1[Appellate Board].— The [Appellate Board], on application of the
Registrar of Copyrights or of any person aggrieved, shall order the rectification of the Register of
Copyrights by—
(a) the making of any entry wrongly omitted to be made in the register, or
(b) the expunging of any entry wrongly made in, or remaining on, the register, or
(c) the correction of any error or defect in the register.
2

[50A. Entries in the Register of Copyrights, etc., to be published.— Every entry made in the

Register of Copyrights or the particulars of any work entered under section 45, the correction of every entry
made in such register under section 49, and every rectification ordered under section 50, shall be published
by the Registrar of Copyrights in the Official Gazette or in such other manner as he may deem fit.]
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 160 (a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
2 Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 17 (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).

CHAPTER XI
INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT
51. When copyright infringed.— Copyright in a work shall be deemed to be infringed—
(a) when any person, without a licence granted by the owner of the copyright or the Registrar of
Copyrights under this Act or in contravention of the conditions of a licence so granted or of any
condition imposed by a competent authority under this Act—
(i) does anything, the exclusive right to do which is by this Act conferred upon the owner of
the copyright, or
1

[(ii) permits for profit any place to be used for the communication of the work to the public
where such communication constitutes an infringement of the copyright in the work, unless
he was not aware and had no reasonable ground for believing that such communication to
the public would be an infringement of copyright; or]

(b) when any person—
(i) makes for sale or hire, or sells or lets for hire, or by way of trade displays or offers for sale or
hire, or
(ii) distributes either for the purpose of trade or to such an extent as to affect prejudicially the
owner of the copyright, or
(iii) by way of trade exhibits in public, or
(iv) imports 2*** into India,
any infringing copies of the work:
3

[Provided that nothing in sub-clause (iv) shall apply to the import of one copy of any work for the

private and domestic use of the importer.]
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the reproduction of a literary, dramatic, musical or
artistic work in the form of a cinematograph film shall be deemed to be an “infringing copy”.
52. Certain acts not to be infringement of copyright.— (1) The following acts shall not constitute an
infringement of copyright, namely,—
4

[(a) a fair dealing with any work, not being a computer programme, for the purposes of—
(i) private or personal use, including research;

1 Subs.

by Act 38 of 1994, s. 16, for sub-clause (ii) (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).

2 The brackets and words “(except for the private and domestic use of the importer)” omitted by Act 65 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8-10-1985).
3 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 16, for the proviso (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
4 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32(i), for clause (a) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

(ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work;
(iii) the reporting of current events and current affairs, including the reporting of a lecture
delivered in public.
Explanation.— The storing of any work in any electronic medium for the purposes mentioned in
this clause, including the incidental storage of any computer programme which is not itself an
infringing copy for the said purposes, shall not constitute infringement of copyright.]
1

[(aa) the making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful possessor of a copy

of such computer programme, from such copy—
(i) in order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it was supplied; or
(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a temporary protection against loss, destruction or
damage in order only to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it was
supplied;]
2

[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to obtain information essential for operating inter-operability of

an independently created computer programme with other programmes by a lawful possessor of a
computer programme provided that such information is not otherwise readily available;
(ac) the observation, study or test of functioning of the computer programme in order to
determine the ideas and principles which underline any elements of the programme while performing
such acts necessary for the functions for which the computer programme was supplied;
(ad) the making of copies or adaptation of the computer programme from a personally legally
obtained copy for non-commercial personal use;]
3

[(b) the transient or incidental storage of a work or performance purely in the technical process of

electronic transmission or communication to the public;
(c)transient or incidental storage of a work or performance for the purpose of providing electronic
links, access or integration, where such links, access or integration has not been expressly prohibited by
the right holder, unless the person responsible is aware or has reasonable grounds for believing that such
storage is of an infringing copy:
Provided that if the person responsible for the storage of the copy has received a written complaint
from the owner of copyright in the work, complaining that such transient or incidental storage is an
infringement, such person responsible for the storage shall refrain from facilitating such access for a
1 Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 17 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
2 Ins. by Act 49 of 1999, s. 7 (w.e.f. 15-1-2000).
3 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32(ii), for clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) and (j) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

period of twenty-one days or till he receives an order from the competent court refraining from facilitation
access and in case no such order is received before the expiry of such period of twenty-one days, he
may continue to provide the facility of such access;
(d) the reproduction of any work for the purpose of a judicial proceeding or for the purpose of a
report of a judicial proceeding;
(e) the reproduction or publication of any work prepared by the Secretariat of a Legislature or,
where the legislature consists of two Houses, by the Secretariat of either House of the Legislature,
exclusively for the use of the members of that Legislature;
(f) the reproduction of any work in a certified copy made or supplied in accordance with any law for
the time being in force;
(g) the reading or recitation in public of reasonable extracts from a published literacy or dramatic
work;
(h) the publication in a collection, mainly composed of non-copyright matter, bona fide intended for
instructional use, and so described in the title and in any advertisement issued by or on behalf of the
publisher, of short passages from published literary or dramatic works, not themselves published for such
use in which copyright subsists:
Provided that not more than two such passages from works by the same author are published by the
same publisher during any period of five years.
Explanation.— In the case of a work of joint authorship, references in this clause to passages from works
shall include references to passages from works by any one or more of the authors of those passages or
by any one or more of those authors in collaboration with any other person;
(i) the reproduction of any work—
(i) by a teacher or a pupil in the course of instruction; or
(ii) as part of the question to be answered in an examination; or
(iii) in answers to such questions;
(j) the performance, in the course of the activities of an educational institution, of a literary, dramatic
or musical work by the staff and students of the institution, or of a cinematograph film or a sound recording
if the audience is limited to such staff and students, the parents and guadians of the students and persons
connected with the activities of the institution or the communication to such an audience of a
cinematograph film or sound recording;
(k) the causing of a recording to be heard in public by utilising it,—
(i) in an enclosed room or hall meant for the common use of residents in any residential
premises (not being a hotel or similar commercial establishment) as part of the amenities provided

exclusively or mainly for residents therein; or
(ii) as part of the activities of a club or similar organisation which is not established or
conducted for profit;]
(l) the performance of a literary, dramatic or musical work by an amateur club or society, if the
performance is given to a non-paying audience, or for the benefit of a religious institution;
(m) the reproduction in a newspaper, magazine or other periodical of an article on current economic,
political, social or religious topics, unless the author of such article has expressly reserved to himself the
right of such reproduction;
1

[(n) the storing of a work in any medium by e lectronic means by a non-commercial public

library, for preservation if the library already possesses a non-digital copy of the work;]
(o) the making of not more than three copies of a book (including a pamphlet, sheet of music, map,
chart or plan) by or under the direction of the person in charge of a 2[non-commercial public library] for
the use of the library if such book is not available for sale in India;
(p) the reproduction, for the purpose of research or private study or with a view to publication, of an
unpublished literary, dramatic or musical work kept in a library, museum or other institution to which
the public has access:
Provided that where the identity of the author of any such work or, in the case of a work of joint
authorship, of any of the authors is known to the library, museum or other institution, as the case may be,
the provisions of this clause shall apply only if such reproduction is made at a time more than 3[sixty
years] from the date of the death of the author or, in the case of a work of joint authorship, from the
death of the author whose identity is known or, if the identity of more authors than one is known from
the death of such of those authors who dies last;
(q) the reproduction or publication of—
(i) any matter which has been published in any Official Gazette except an Act of a
Legislature;
(ii) any Act of a Legislature subject to the condition that such Act is reproduced or
published together with any commentary thereon or any other original matter;
(iii) the report of any committee, commission, council, board or other like body appointed by
the Government if such report has been laid on the Table of the Legislature, unless the
reproduction or publication of such report is prohibited by the Government;

1 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32(iii), for clause (n) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32(iv), for “public library” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
3 Subs. by Act 49 of 1999, s. 7, for “fifty years” (w.e.f. 15-1-2000).

(iv) any judgment or order of a court, tribunal or other judicial authority, unless the
reproduction or publication of such judgment or order is prohibited by the court, the
tribunal or other judicial authority, as the case may be;
(r) the production or publication of a translation in any Indian language of an Act of a
Legislature and of any rules or orders made thereunder—
(v) if no translation of such Act or rules or orders in that language has been previously been
produced or published by the Government; or
(vi) where a translation of such Act or rules or orders in that language has been produced or
published by the Government, if the translation is not available for sale to the public:
Provided that such translation contains a statement at a prominent place to the effect
that the translation has not been authorised or accepted as authentic by the Government;
1

[(s) the making or publishing of a painting, drawing, engraving or photograph of a work of

architecture or the display of a work of architecture;]
(t) the making or publishing of a painting, drawing, engraving or photograph of a sculpture, or other
artistic work falling under sub-clause (iii) of clause (c) of section 2, if such work is permanently situate in a
public place or any premises to which the public has access;
(u) the inclusion in a cinematograph film of—
(i) any artistic work permanently situate in a public place or any premises to which the public
has access; or
(ii) any other artistic work, if such inclusion is only by way of background or is otherwise
incidental to the principal matters represented in the film;
(v) the use by the author of an artistic work, where the author of such work is not the owner of the
copyright therein, of any mould, cast, sketch, plan, model or study made by him for the purpose of the
work:
Provided that he does not thereby repeat or imitate the main design of the work;
2

[(w) the making of a three-dimensional object from a two-dimensional artistic work, such as a

technical drawing, for the purposes of industrial application of any purely functional part of a useful
device;]
(x) the reconstruction of a building or structure in accordance with the architectural drawings or plans
by reference to which the building or structure was originally constructed:
Provided that the original construction was made with the consent or licence of the owner of the
1 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 17, for clause (s) (w.e.f. 9-8-1995).
2 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32, for clause (w) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

copyright in such drawings and plans;
(y) in relation to a literary, 1[dramatic, artistic or] musical work recorded or reproduced in any
cinematograph film, the exhibition of such film after the expiration of the term of copyright therein:
Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (ii) of clause (a), sub-clause (i) of clause (b) and
clauses (d), (f), (g), (m) and (p) shall not apply as respects any act unless that act is accompanied by
an acknowledgment—
(i) identifying the work by its title or other description; and
(ii) unless the work is anonymous or the author of the work has previously agreed or required that
no acknowledgment of his name should be made, also identifying the author;
2

[(z) the making of an ephemeral recording, by a broadcasting organisation using its own facilities for its

own broadcast by a broadcasting organisation of a work which it has the right to broadcast; and the retention
of such recording for archival purposes on the ground of its exceptional documentary character;
(za) the performance of a literary, dramatic or musical work or the communication to the public of
such work or of a sound recording in the course of any bona fide religious ceremony or an official
ceremony held by the Central Government or the State Government or any local authority.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this clause, religious ceremony including a marriage procession and
other social festivities associated with a marriage;]
3

[(zb) the adaptation, reproduction, issue of copies or communication to the public of any work in any

accessible format, by—
(i) any person to facilitate persons with disability to access to works including sharing with
any person with disability of such accessible format for private or personal use,
educational purpose or research; or
(ii) any organisation working for the benefit of the persons with disabilities in case the normal
format prevents the enjoyment of such works by such persons:
Provided that the copies of the works in such accessible format are made available to the
persons with disabilities on a non-profit basis but to recover only the cost of production:
Provided further that the organisation shall ensure that the copies of works in such accessible
format are used only by persons with disabilities and takes reasonable steps to prevent its
entry into ordinary channels of business.
1 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32, for “dramatic or” (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 17 (w.e.f. 9-8-1995).
3 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-clause, “any organisation” includes an organisation
registered under section 12A of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) and working for the
benefit of persons with disability or recognised under Chapter X of the Persons with Disabilities
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996) or
receiving grants from the Government for facilitating access to persons with disabilities or an
educational institution or library or archives recognised by the Government;
1

[(zc) the importation of copies of any literary or artistic work, such as labels, company logos or

promotional or explanatory material, that is purely incidental to other goods or products being imported
lawfully.]
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to the doing of any act in relation to the translation of a
literary, dramatic or musical work or the adaptation of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work as they
apply in relation to the work itself.
2

[52A. Particulars to be included in 3[sound recording] and video films.— (1) No person shall

publish a 3[sound recording] in respect of any work unless the following particulars are displayed on the
3

[sound recording] and on any container thereof, namely:—
(a) the name and address of the person who has made the sound recording;
(b) the name and address of the owner of the copyright in such work; and
(c) the year of its first publication.
(2) No person shall publish a video film in respect of any work unless the following particulars are
displayed in the video film, when exhibited, and on the video cassette or other container thereof,
namely:—
(a) if such work is a cinematograph film required to be certified for exhibition under the provisions
of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952), a copy of the certificate granted by the Board of Film
Certification under section 5A of that Act in respect of such work;
(b) the name and address of the person who has made the video film and a declaration by him that he
has obtained the necessary licence or consent from the owner of the copyright in such work for making
such video film; and
(c) the name and address of the owner for the copyright in such work.]
52B. [Accounts and audit.] Omitted by the Copyright Act, 2012 (27 of 2012), s. 33 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

1 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Ins. by Act 65 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 8-10-1984).
3 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).

1

[53. Importation of infringing copies.— (1) The owner of any right conferred by this Act in respect of

any work or any performance embodied in such work, or his duly authorised agent, may give notice in writing
to the Commissioner of Customs, or to any other officer authorised in this behalf by the Central
Board of Excise and Customs,—
(a) that he is the owner of the said right, with proof thereof; and
(b) that he requests the Commissioner for a period specified in the notice, which shall not exceed one
year, to treat infringing copies of the work as prohibited goods, and that infringing copies of the work are
expected to arrive in India at a time and a place specified in the notice.
(2) The Commissioner, after scrutiny of the evidence furnished by the owner of the right and on being
satisfied may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), treat infringing copies of the work as prohibited
goods that have been imported into India, excluding goods in transit:
Provided that the owner of the work deposits such amount as the Commissioner may require as
security having regard to the likely expenses on demurrage, cost of storage and compensation to the
importer in case it is found that the works are not infringing copies.
(3) When any goods treated as prohibited under sub-section (2) have been detained, the Customs
Officer detaining them shall inform the importer as well as the person who gave notice under sub-section
(1) of the detention of such goods within forty-eight hours of their detention.
(4) The Customs Officer shall release the goods, and they shall no longer be treated as prohibited
goods, if the person who gave notice under sub-section (1) does not produce any order from a court
having jurisdiction as to the temporary or permanent disposal of such goods within fourteen days from the date
of their detention.]
2

[53A. Resale share right in original copies.— (1) In the case of resale for a price exceeding ten

thousand rupees, of the original copy of a painting, sculpture or drawing, or of the original manuscript of a
literary or dramatic work or musical work, the author of such work if he was the first owner of rights under
section 17 or his legal heirs shall, notwithstanding any assignment of copyright in such work, have a right to
share in the resale price of such original copy or manuscript in accordance with the provisions of this section:
Provided that such right shall cease to exist on the expiration of the term of copyright in the work.
(2) The share referred to in sub-section (1) shall be such as the 3[Appellate Board] may fix and the
decision of the 2[Appellate Board] in this behalf shall be final:
1 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 34, for section 53 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
2 Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 19 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
3 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

Provided that the 2[Appellate Board] may fix different shares for different classes of work:
Provided further that in no case shall the share exceed ten percent of the resale price.
(3) If any dispute arises regarding the right conferred by this section, it shall be referred to the
1

[Appellate Board] whose decision shall be final.]
CHAPTER XII CIVIL
REMEDIES
54. Definition.— For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression

“owner of copyright” shall include—
(a)

an exclusive licensee;

(b)

in the case of an anonymous or pseudonymous literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, the
publisher of the work, until the identity of the author or, in the case of an anonymous work of joint
authorship, or a work of joint authorship published under names all of which are pseudonyms, the
identity of any of the authors, is disclosed publicly by the author and the publisher or is otherwise
established to the satisfaction of the 1[Appellate Board] by that author or his legal representatives.

55. Civil remedies for infringement of copyright.— (1) Where copyright in any work has been
infringed, the owner of the copyright shall, except as otherwise provided by this Act, be entitled to all such
remedies by way of injunction, damages, accounts and otherwise as are or may be conferred by law for the
infringement of a right:
Provided that if the defendant proves that at the date of the infringement he was not aware and had no
reasonable ground for believing that copyright subsisted in the work, the plaintiff shall not be entitled to any
remedy other than an injunction in respect of the infringement and a decree for the whole or part of the
profits made by the defendant by the sale of the infringing copies as the court may in the circumstances deem
reasonable.
(2) Where, in the case of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, 2[or, subject to the provisions of
sub-section (3) of section 13, a cinematograph film or sound recording, a name purporting to be that of the
author, or the publisher, as the case may be, of that work, appears] on copies of the work as published, or, in
the case of an artistic work, appeared on the work when it was made, the person whose name so appears or
appeared shall, in any proceeding in respect of infringement of copyright in such work, be presumed,
unless the contrary is proved, to be the author or the publisher of the work, as the case may be.
(3) The costs of all parties in any proceedings in respect of the infringement of copyright shall be in the
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160(a), for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
2 Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 35, for “a name purporting to be, that of the author or the publisher, as the case may be, appear” (w.e.f. 21-6-

2012).

discretion of the court.

56. Protection of separate rights.— Subject to the provisions of this Act, where the several rights
comprising the copyright in any work are owned by different persons, the owner of any such right shall, to
the extent of that right, be entitled to the remedies provided by this Act and may individually enforce such
right by means of any suit, action or other proceeding without making the owner of any other right a party to
such suit, action or proceeding.
57. Author’s special rights.— 1[(1) Independently of the author’s copyright and even after the
assignment either wholly or partially of the said copyright, the author of a work shall have the right—
(a)

to claim authorship of the work; and

(b)

to restrain or claim damages in respect of any distortion, mutilation, modification or other act in

relation to the said work 2[ ***] if such distortion, mutilation, modification or other act would be
prejudicial to his honour or reputation:
Provided that the author shall not have any right to restrain or claim damages in respect of any
adaptation of a computer programme to which clause (aa) of sub-section (1) of section 52 applies.
Explanation.— Failure to display a work or to display it to the satisfaction of the author shall not be
deemed to be an infringement of the rights conferred by this section.]
(2) The right conferred upon an author of a work by sub-section (1), 3[ ***], may be exercised by the
legal representatives of the author.

58. Rights of owner against persons possessing or dealing with infringing copies.— All infringing
copies of any work in which copyright subsists, and all plates used or intended to be used for the
production of such infringing copies, shall be deemed to be the property of the owner of the copyright, who
accordingly may take proceedings for the recovery of possession thereof or in respect of the conversion
thereof:
Provided that the owner of the copyright shall not be entitled to any remedy in respect of the conversion of
any infringing copies, if the opponent proves—
(a) that he was not aware and had no reasonable ground to believe that copyright subsisted in the work of
which such copies are alleged to be infringing copies; or
1 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 20, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
2 The words “which is done before the expiration of the term of copyright” omitted by Act 27 of 2012, s. 36 (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).
3 The words “other than the right to claim authorship of the work” omitted by Act 27 of 2012, s. 36, (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).

(b) that he had reasonable grounds for believing that such copies or plates do not involve infringement of
the copyright in any work.
59. Restriction on remedies in the case of works of architecture.— (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in 1[the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963)], where the construction of a building or other
structure which infringes or which, if completed, would infringe the copyright in some other work has been
commenced, the owner of the copyright shall not be entitled to obtain an injunction to restrain the
construction of such building or structure or to order its demolition.
(2) Nothing in Section 58 shall apply in respect of the construction of a building or other structure
which infringes or which, if completed, would infringe the copyright in some other work.
60.

Remedy in the case of groundless threat of legal proceedings.— Where any person claiming to be

the owner of copyright in any work, by circulars, advertisements or otherwise, threatens any other person
with any legal proceedings or liability in respect of an alleged infringement of the copyright, any person
aggrieved thereby may, notwithstanding anything contained 2[in section 34 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963
(47 of 1963)], institute a declaratory suit that the alleged infringement to which the threats related was not in
fact an infringement of any legal rights of the person making such threats and may in any such suit—
(a) obtain an injunction against the continuance of such threats; and
(b) recover such damages, if any, as he has sustained by reason of such threats:
Provided that this section shall not apply if the person making such threats, with due diligence,
commences and prosecutes an action for infringement of the copyright claimed by him.
61. Owner of copyright to be party to the proceeding.— (1) In every civil suit or other proceeding
regarding infringement of copyright instituted by an exclusive licensee, the owner of the copyright shall,
unless the court otherwise directs, be made a defendant and where such owner is made a defendant, he shall
have the right to dispute the claim of the exclusive licensee.
(2) Where any civil suit or other proceeding regarding infringement of copyright instituted by an
exclusive licensee is successful, no fresh suit or other proceeding in respect of the same cause of action shall
lie at the instance of the owner of the copyright.
62. Jurisdiction of court over matters arising under this Chapter.— (1) Every suit or other civil
proceeding arising under this Chapter in respect of the infringement of copyright in any work or the
infringement of any other right conferred by this Act shall be instituted in the district court having
jurisdiction.

1 Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 20, for “the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (1 of 1877)” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).
2 Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “ in section 42 the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (1 of 1877)” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984).

(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), a “district court having jurisdiction” shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or any other law for the time being in
force, include a district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, at the time of the institution of the
suit or other proceeding, the person instituting the suit or other proceeding or, where there are more than one
such persons, any of them actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for
gain.
CHAPTER XIII

OFFENCES
63. Offence of infringement of copyright or other rights conferred by this Act.— Any person who
knowingly infringes or abets the infringement of—
(a) the copyright in a work, or
(b) any other right conferred by this Act 1[except the right conferred by section 53A],
2

[shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may

extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to
two lakh rupees]:
Provided that 1[where the infringement has not been made for gain in the course of trade or business] the
court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a fine of less than fifty thousand rupees.]
Explanation.— Construction of a building or other structure which infringes or which, if completed,
would infringe the copyright in some other work shall not be an offence under this section.
3

[63A. Enhanced penalty on second and subsequent convictions.— Whoever having already been

convicted of an offence under section 63 is again convicted of any such offence shall be punishable for the
second and for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year
but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which
may extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that 4[where the infringement has not been made for gain in the course of trade or business] the
court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of less than one year or a fine of less than one lakh rupees:
Provided further that for the purposes of this section, no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction

1 Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 21 (w.e.f 10-05-1995).
2 Subs. by Act 65 of 1984, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 08-10-1984)
3 Ins. by Act 65 of 1994, s.6 (w.e.f 8-10-1984)
4 Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 22 (w.e.f 10-05-1995)

made before the commencement of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1984 (65 of 1984).]
1

[63B. Knowing use of infringing copy of computer programme to be an offence.— Any person who

knowingly makes use on a computer of an infringing copy of a computer programme shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven days but which may extend to three
years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh
rupees:
Provided that where the computer programme has not been used for gain or in the course of trade or
business, the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, not impose any
sentence of imprisonment and may impose a fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.]
64. Power of police to seize infringing copies.— 2[(1) Any police officer, not below the rank of a subinspector, may, if he is satisfied that an offence under section 63 in respect of the infringement of copyright
in any work has been, is being, or is likely to be, committed, seize without warrant, all copies of the work, and
all plates used for the purposes of making infringing copies of the work, wherever found, and all copies and
plates so seized shall, as soon as practicable be produced before a Magistrate.]
(2) Any person having an interest in any copies of a work 3[, or plates] seized under sub-section (1) may,
within fifteen days of such seizure, make an application to the Magistrate for such copies 2[, or plates] being
restored to him and the Magistrate, after hearing the applicant and the complainant and making such further
inquiry as may be necessary, shall make such order on the application as he may deem fit.
65. Possession of plates for purpose of making infringing copies.— Any person who knowingly makes,
or has in his possession, any plate for the purpose of making infringing copies of any work in which
copyright subsists shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 4[two years and shall also be
liable to fine.]
5

[65A. Protection of technological measures.— (1) Any person who circumvents an effective

technological measure applied for the purpose of protecting any of the rights conferred by this Act, with the
intention of infringing such rights, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two years and
shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent any person from,—
(a) doing anything referred to therein for a purpose not expressly prohibited by this Act:
Provided that any person facilitating circumvention by another person of a technological measure for
such a purpose shall maintain a complete record of such other person including his name, address and all
1 Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 23 (w.e.f 10-05-1995)
2 Subs. by Act 65 of 1984, s. 7, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 08-10-1984)
3 Ins. by s.7, Ibid, (w.e.f. 08-10-1984)
4 Subs. by s.8, for “ one year, or with fine or with both”, Ibid (w.e.f. 08-10-1984)
5 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 37 (w.e.f. 21-06-2012)

relevant particulars necessary to identify him and the purpose for which he has been facilitated; or
(b) doing anything necessary to conduct encryption research using a lawfully obtained encrypted
copy; or
(c) conducting any lawful investigation; or
(d) doing anything necessary for the purpose of testing the security of a computer system or a
computer network with the authorisation of its owner; or
(e) operator; or
(f) doing anything necessary to circumvent technological measures intended for identification or
surveillance of a user; or
(g) taking measures necessary in the interest of national security.
65B. Protection of Rights Management Information.— Any person, who knowingly, —
(i) removes or alters any rights management information without authority, or
(ii) distributes, imports for distribution, broadcasts or communicates to the public, without authority, copies
of any work, or performance knowing that electronic rights management information has been removed
or altered without authority,
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that if the rights management information has been tampered with in any work, the owner of
copyright in such work may also avail of civil remedies provided under Chapter XII against the persons indulging
in such acts.]
66. Disposal of infringing copies or plates for purpose of making infringing copies.— The Court trying
any offence under this Act may, whether the alleged offender is convicted or not, order that all copies of the
work or all plates in the possession of the alleged offender, which appear to it to be infringing copies, or plates
for the purpose of making infringing copies, be delivered up to the owner of the copyright 1[or may make such
order as it may deem fit regarding the disposal of such copies or plates].
67. Penalty for making false entries in register, etc., for producing or tendering false entries.— Any
person who,—
(a) makes or causes to be made a false entry in the Register of Copyrights kept under this Act, or
(b) makes or causes to be made a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of any entry in such register, or
(c) produces or tenders or causes to be produced or tendered as evidence any such entry or writing, knowing
the same to be false,
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

1 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 38 (w.e.f. 21-06-2012)

68. Penalty for making false statements for the purpose of deceiving or influencing any authority or
officer.— Any person who,—
(a) with a view to deceiving any authority or officer in the execution of the provisions of this Act, or
(b) with a view to procuring or influencing the doing or omission of anything in relation to this Act or any
matter thereunder,
makes a false statement or representation knowing the same to be false, shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
1

[68A. Penalty for contravention of section 52A.— Any person who publishes a 2[sound recording] or a

video film in contravention of the provisions of section 52A shall be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.]
69. Offences by companies.— (1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for, the
conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of such offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any person liable to any punishment, if he
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been
committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of persons; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
70. Cognizance of offences.— No Court inferior to that of 3[a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class] shall try any offence under this Act.
CHAPTER XIV
APPEALS
71. Appeals against certain orders of Magistrate.— Any person aggrieved by an order made under subsection (2) of section 64 or section 66 may, within thirty days of the date of such order, appeal to the Court to
1 Ins. by Act 65 of 1984, s. 9, (w.e.f. 08-10-1984)
2 Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record” (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).
3 Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s.22, for “a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class” (w.e.f. 9-8-1984)

which appeals from the court making the order ordinarily lie, and such appellate court may direct that execution
of the order be stayed pending disposal of the appeal.
72. Appeals against orders of Registrar of Copyrights and 1[Appellate Board].— (1) Any person
aggrieved by any final decision or order of the Registrar of Copyrights may, within three months from the date
of the order or decision, appeal to the 1[Appellate Board].
(2) Any person aggrieved by any final decision or order of the 1 [Appellate Board], not being a
decision or order made in an appeal under sub-section (1), may, within three months from the date of such
decision or order, appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction the appellant actually and voluntarily
resides or carries on business or personally works for gain:
Provided that no such appeal shall lie against a decision of the 1[Appellate Board] under section 6.
(3) In calculating the period of three months provided for an appeal under this section, the time taken in
granting a certified copy of the order or record of the decision appealed against shall be excluded.
73. Procedure for appeals.— The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act as to the
procedure to be followed in respect of appeals made to it under section 72.
CHAPTER XV
MISCELLANEOUS
74. Registrar of Copyrights and 1[Appellate Board] to possess certain powers of civil courts.— The
Registrar of Copyrights and the 1[Appellate Board] shall have the powers of a civil court when trying a suit under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely, —
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the local limits of the jurisdiction of
the Registrar of Copyrights or the 1[Appellate Board], as the case may be, shall be the limits of the territory of
India.
75. Orders for payment of money passed by Registrar of Copyrights and 1[Appellate Board] to be
executable as a decree.— Every order made by the Registrar of Copyrights or the 1[Appellate Board] under this
Act for the payment of any money or by the High Court in any appeal against any such order of the 1[Appellate
Board] shall, on a certificate issued by the Registrar of Copyrights, the 1[Appellate Board] or the Registrar of the
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

High Court, as the case may be, be deemed to be a decree of a civil court and shall be executable in the same
manner as a decree of such court.
76. Protection of action taken in good faith.— No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any
person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
77. Certain persons to be public servants.— Every officer appointed under this Act and every member of
the 1[Appellate Board] shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860).
78. Power to make rules.— (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
2

rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central Government may

make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
3

[***]

(b) the form of complaints and applications to be made, and the licences to be granted, under this
Act;
(c) the procedure to be followed in connection with any proceeding before the Registrar of Copyrights;
4

[(cA) the form and manner in which an organisation may apply to the 1[Appellate Board] for compulsory
licence for disabled and the fee which may accompany such application under sub-section (1) of 31B;

(cB) the manner in which a person making sound recording may give prior notice of his intention to make
sound recording under sub-section (2) of section 31C;
(cC) the register and books of account and the details of existing stock which a person making sound
recording may maintain under sub-section (5) of section 31C;
(cD) the manner in which prior notice may be given by a broadcasting organisation under sub-section (2) of
section 31D;
(cE) the reports and accounts which may be maintained under clause (a), and the inspection of records and
books of account which may be made under clause (b) or sub-section (7) of section 31D];
5

[(ca) the conditions for submission of application under sub-section (2) of section 33;

(cb) the conditions subject to which a copyright society may be registered under sub-section (3) of section
33;
(cc) the inquiry for cancellation of registration under sub-section (4) of section 33;]
6

[(ccA) the manner in which a copyright society may publish its Tariff Scheme under sub-section (1) of

1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).
2 For the Copyright Rules, 1958, see Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, s.3, p.167.
3 Clause (a) omitted by Finance Act, 2017, s. 160(e).
4 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 39(ii) (w.e.f. 21-06-2012)
5 Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 24 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995)
6 Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 39(iii) (w.e.f. 21-06-2012)

section 33A;
(ccB) the fee which is to be paid before filing an appeal to the 1[Appellate Board] under sub-section (2) of
section 33A;
(ccC) the form of application for renewal of registration of a copyright society and the fee which may
accompany such application under sub-section (3A) of section 33;]
2

[(cd) the conditions subject to which the copyright society may accept authorisation under clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 34 and the conditions subject to which owners or rights have right to withdraw
such authorisation under clause (d) of that sub-section;

(ce) the conditions subject to which a copyright society may issue licences, collect fees and distribute such
fees amongst owners of rights under sub-section (3) of section 34;]
(cf) the manner in which the approval of the owners of rights regarding collection and distribution of fees,
approval for utilisation of any amount collected as fees and to provide to such owners information
concerning activities in relation to the administration of their rights under sub-section (1) of section 35;
(cg) the returns to be filed by copyright societies to the Registrar of Copyrights under sub-section (1) of
section 36;]
(d ) the manner of determining any royalties payable under this Act, and the security to be taken for the
payment of such royalties;
3

[(da) the manner of payment of royalty under clause (j) of sub-section (1) of section 52;]

4

[***]

(e) the form of Register of Copyrights to be kept under this Act and the particulars to be entered therein;
(f) the matters in respect of which the Registrar of Copyrights and the 1[Appellate Board] shall have powers
of a civil court;
(g) the fees which may be payable under this Act;
(h) the regulation of business of the Copyright Office and of all things by this Act placed under the
direction or control of the Registrar of Copyrights.
5

[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of

Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

2

Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s.24 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995)

3 Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s.24 (w.e.f. 10-5-1995)
4 Clause (db) omitted by Act 27 of 2012, s.39 (iv) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012)
5 Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 23, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 9-8-1984)

of anything previously done under that rule.]
79. Repeals, savings and transitional provisions.— (1) The Indian Copyright Act, 1914 (3 of 1914),
and the Copyright Act of 1911 passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom as modified in its
application to India by the Indian Copyright Act, 1914 are hereby repealed.
(2) Where any person has, before the commencement of this Act, taken any action whereby he has
incurred any expenditure or liabilities in connection with the reproduction or performance of any work in a
manner which at the time was lawful or for the purpose of or with a view to the reproduction or
performance of a work at a time when such reproduction or performance would, but for the coming into force
of this Act, have been lawful, nothing in this section shall diminish or prejudice any rights or interests
arising from or in connection with such action which are subsisting and valuable at the said date, unless the
person who, by virtue of this Act, becomes entitled to restrain such reproduction or performance agrees to pay
such compensation as, failing agreement, may be determined by the 1[Appellate Board].
(3) Copyright shall not subsist by virtue of this Act in any work in which copyright did not subsist
immediately before the commencement of this Act under any Act repealed by sub-section (1).
(4) Where copyright subsisted in any work immediately before the commencement of this Act, the rights
comprising such copyright shall, as from the date of such commencement, be the rights specified in section 14 in
relation to the class of works to which such work belongs, and where any new rights are
conferred by that section, the owner of such rights shall be—
(a) in any case where copyright in the work was wholly assigned before the commencement of this
Act, the assignee or his successor-in-interest;
(b) in any other case, the person who was the first owner of the copyright in the work under any Act
repealed by sub-section (1) or his legal representatives.
(5) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, where any person is entitled immediately before the
commencement of this Act to copyright in any work or any right in such copyright or to an interest in any such
right, he shall continue to be entitled to such right or interest for the period for which he would have been
entitled thereto if this Act had not come into force.
(6) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to render any act done before its commencement an
infringement of copyright if that act would not otherwise have constituted such an infringement.
(7) Save as otherwise provided in this section, nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the
application of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with respect to the effect of repeals.

1 Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board” (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).

